Title: A chemical language model for reticular materials design

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20389v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:18:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
# A chemical language model for reticular materials design 

Dhruv Menon 1, Vivek Singh 2,3,4 , Xu Chen 1, Mohammad Reza Alizadeh Kiapi 1, Ivan Zyuzin 1, Hamish W. Macleod 1, Nakul Rampal 2,3,4 , William Shepard 5, Omar M. Yaghi 2,3,4 and David Fairen-Jimenez 1,* 

> 1Department of Chemical Engineering & Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
> 2Department of Chemistry, University of California – Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
> 3Bakar Institute of Digital Materials for the Planet, Berkeley, CA, USA
> 4KACST–UC Berkeley Center of Excellence for Nanomaterials for Clean Energy Applications, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
> 5Synchrotron SOLEIL-UR1, L’Orme des Merisiers, Départementale 128, 91190 Saint-Aubin, France

Reticular chemistry has enabled the synthesis of tens of thousands of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), yet the discovery of new materials still relies largely on intuition-driven linker design and iterative experimentation. As a result, researchers explore only a small fraction of the vast chemical space accessible to reticular materials, limiting the systematic discovery of frameworks with targeted properties. Here, we introduce Nexerra 𝑅 1, a building-block chemical language model that enables inverse design in reticular chemistry through the targeted generation of organic linkers. Rather than generating complete frameworks directly, Nexerra 𝑅 1 operates at the level of molecular building blocks, preserving the modular logic that underpins reticular synthesis. The model supports both unconstrained generation of low-connectivity linkers and scaffold-constrained design of symmetric multidentate motifs compatible with predefined nodes and topologies. We further combine linker generation with flow-guided distributional targeting to steer the generative process toward application-relevant objectives while maintaining chemical validity and assembly feasibility. The generated linkers are subsequently assembled into three-dimensional frameworks and structurally optimized to produce candidate materials compatible with experimental synthesis. Using Nexerra 𝑅 1, we validate this strategy by rediscovering known MOFs and by proposing the experimental synthesis of a previously unreported framework, CU-525, generated entirely in silico . Together, these results establish a general inverse-design paradigm for reticular materials in which controllable chemical language modelling enables the direct translation from computational design to synthesizable frameworks. 

Public repository : Nexerra 𝑅 1 | Model weights : Zenodo 

## Introduction 

The geometry-guided design and assembly of periodically extended structures through reticular chemistry has transformed the discovery of porous materials, enabling breakthroughs in areas such as carbon capture (Zhou et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025a; Lin et al., 2021) and water harvesting (Song et al., 2023). Over the past three decades, researchers have discovered most metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) through chemical-intuition-driven experimentation. While this approach has delivered remarkable materials with exceptional properties, progress has remained largely empirical and slow, which has limited the systematic exploration of the vast chemical space accessible to MOFs and limited their rapid translation into industrial applications (Chakraborty et al., 2025; Asgari et al., 2025; Wright et al., 2025). Computational methods have begun to address this challenge. Classical molecular simulations and machine-learning (ML) approaches now allow researchers to screen large libraries of materials in silico , expanding the search space and reducing experimental effort (Jablonka et al., 2020; Moghadam et al., 2024). Despite these advances, current strategies remain 

March 19, 2026  

> Corresponding author(s): df334@cam.ac.uk
> ©2026 The Authors. All rights reserved
> arXiv:2603.20389v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 20 Mar 2026

fundamentally constrained. High-throughput screening still explores only a tiny fraction of the enormous design space of MOFs and relies entirely on known structures or, at best, combinatorially assembled hypothetical frameworks. As a result, current approaches struggle to guide the discovery of genuinely new materials designed from the outset to exhibit target properties. In this context, generative modelling offers a promising route towards the inverse design of MOFs with targeted properties. These approaches learn the underlying statistical structure of chemical datasets and use this knowledge to generate new candidates that satisfy predefined objectives. Several generative approaches have recently emerged, including chemical language models, score-based models, and denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs), which have shown considerable success across molecular design problems such as small-molecule generation (Elijošius et al., 2025), drug discovery (Krishnan et al., 2025), de novo protein design (Bennett et al., 2026), reaction mechanism prediction (Joung et al., 2025) and inorganic materials design (Zeni et al., 2025). Among these approaches, chemical language models (CLMs) have attracted particular attention. These models treat molecular representations as sequences and learn to predict the probability of the next token given the preceding context (Zhao et al., 2023; Skinnider et al., 2021). By learning the statistical patterns embedded in larger chemical datasets, CLMs can generate entirely new molecules consistent with the training distribution (Skinnider et al., 2021). When trained on massive datasets, these architectures scale into large language models (LLMs), capable of capturing increasingly complex relationships (Zhao et al., 2023). Other generative strategies have also proven powerful. Diffusion-based approaches, such as DDPMs, iteratively denoise data corrupted with noise, generating highly diverse outputs of interest (Igashov et al., 2024). Score-based models provide a closely related formulation in which neural networks estimate gradients of the logarithmic probability density (known as the score) of noise-corrupted data (Lee et al., 2023). Despite this rapid progress, applying generative modelling to reticular chemistry remains challenging. Many existing approaches struggle to ensure synthetic feasibility, adapt to the modular design principles of reticular materials, or generate structures that remain compatible with experimentally accessible building blocks and topologies. As a result, significant opportunities remain to develop generative strategies that directly address the unique constraints of reticular synthesis and enable the targeted discovery of new MOFs (Cleeton and Sarkisov, 2025; Yao et al., 2021; Park et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025). We reason that decoupling the design process at the building-block level ( Figure 1a )would provide stronger control over generative workflows and enable more targeted MOF discovery. This approach mimics experimental practice, where synthetic chemists rationally select or design molecular building blocks (MBBs) with pre-specified geometries to assemble desired nets (Jiang et al., 2021). Here, we introduce Nexerra 𝑅 1, an unsupervised CLM that generates diverse, synthesizable, organic linkers that can be fine-tuned towards a wide range of application-specific properties of interest, enabling inverse MOF design. Nexerra 𝑅 1 supports both the unconstrained design of bidentate and tridentate linkers, and the scaffold- or functional motif-constrained design of symmetric, multidentate linkers (e.g., porphyrin- and pyrene-derived linkers). Under the formulation of flow-matching (Lipman et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2023) – a generalization of the diffusion process – in an optimal transport (OT)-setting (Tong et al., 2023), Nexerra 𝑅 1 can be steered towards target molecular distributions relevant to specific applications. By combining theory-informed reward functions with design templates, Nexerra 𝑅 1 can guide the design of high-performing candidates that are compatible with experimental synthesis. 2Model Architecture 

Designing new MOFs often begins at the level of molecular building blocks (Jiang et al., 2021). In reticular chemistry, frameworks arise from the assembly of inorganic nodes and organic linkers into periodic nets whose geometry determines the resulting structure ( Figure 1a ). To make the design space tractable and ensure reliable targets, we focus on edge-transitive nets (i.e., nets with a single type of non-intersecting edge) and zero-periodic metal-cluster building blocks (MBBs), which are experimentally robust, yet span diverse coordination geometries (see Supplementary Information Section A for representative nets and nodes) (Jiang et al., 2021; Guillerm et al., 2025). Linkers offer a vast design space, where subtle structural changes can induce major effects on MOF structure and function. Nexerra 𝑅 1 uses a textual representation of linkers and learns a continuous latent space for inverse design using a 𝛽 -variational autoencoder ( 𝛽 -VAE) (Burgess et al., 2018) as a probabilistic generative model (for model architecture, see Supplementary Information Section B.2 ). To enable this representation, we encode linkers using SELFIES, a molecular string language with formal grammar that guarantees chemical validity ( Supplementary Information Section B.1 ) (Krenn et al., 2022). Each SELFIES string is then tokenized, with each token acting as a structural unit processed by a neural network ( Figure 1b ). The encoder network approximates a posterior 𝑞 𝜙 (𝑧 |𝑥 )

over a low-dimensional, continuous latent variable 𝑧 ; the decoder specifies a likelihood 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 |𝑧 )

that reconstructs the original sequence from 𝑧 (Figure 1c ). The model is trained by maximizing a 

𝛽 -weighted evidence lower bound, balancing accurate input reconstruction against latent distri-bution regularization (for mathematical formulation, see Supplementary Information Section B.2 ). This continuous latent space enables efficient sampling, smooth exploration and controlled perturbation of the linker chemical space for inverse design (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). The encoder and decoder are implemented as stacks of transformer layers (outlined in 

Supplementary Information Figure B.1 ), transforming a set of vectors from one representation space to another while learning a rich internal representation (Lin et al., 2022). Through the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017), which assigns input-dependent weights to different elements of the sequence, capturing long-range dependencies, molecular strings are mapped to chemically meaningful embeddings that support generative design in the latent space ( Supplementary Information Section B.3 ). Specifically, the encoder contextualizes the input token embeddings and compresses them into a latent representation through the self-attention mechanism, while the decoder projects this representation back into the input space using a combination of masked self-attention and cross-attention mechanisms ( Supplementary Information Section B.3 ). The decoder outputs a probability distribution over the next token in the generated sequence, which we sample to generate new linkers ( Figure 1d , Supplementary Information Section B.4 ). Following post-processing, where the placement of coordination moieties are optimised (optimisation algorithm described in Supplementary Information Section E ), the linkers are subsequently assembled along with the node on a chosen net template to construct a new MOF (Figure 1e , Supplementary Information Section E ). Nexerra 𝑅 1 is trained on a corpus of approximately 900,000 linkers derived from existing databases (Yao et al., 2021) and systematically functionalized to expand chemical diversity (for dataset curation, see Supplementary Information Section C ). To maintain synthetic plausibility, we applied chemistry-based filters to remove linkers with high synthetic complexity, quantified by the synthetic complexity score (SCScore) (Coley et al., 2018). The resulting dataset spans a chemically rich, non-redundant linker space biased toward synthetically accessible chemotypes 3(Supplementary Information Section C ). Nexerra 𝑅 1 achieves per-token reconstruction accuracy of 96.5%, internal diversity > 0.925, and novelty > 96%, consistent with a non-degenerate latent representation of MOF linker space (for training and evaluation, see Supplementary Informa-tion Section D ). Distributions of 10,000 generated linkers against an unseen test set affirm that Nexerra 𝑅 1 reproduces marginal distributions of key descriptors ( Supplementary Figure D.2 ). Under unconstrained sampling, Nexerra 𝑅 1 proposes diverse, multifunctional linkers with extended aromatic cores and dense substitution patterns consistent with the expressive capacity of the architecture (example linkers in Supplementary Figure D.4 ). However, unconstrained generation alone does not guarantee an efficient ‘hit rate’ of application-relevant candidates. We therefore employ templated, seed-guided design to focus sampling on promising regions of linker space and improve the efficiency of the inverse design process. 

Figure 1: Inverse reticular chemistry with Nexerra 𝑅 1. a. MOF structures are represented as nets made of nodes and edges. As a first step, we decouple the design process at the building block level. b. Linkers are encoded as molecular strings (SELFIES) and tokenized into a sequence of symbols. Each token acts as a structural unit that is processed by the model. c. The VAE acts as a bottleneck wherein the encoder defines an approximate posterior over a low-dimensional, continuous latent variable (z), while the decoder reconstructs the original sequence from z. d. Nucleus sampling is used to generate new linkers from the decoder output. e. 

Subject to the synthetic feasibility of the designed linker, an attempt is made to assemble it into the target net. (A detailed theoretical description of the model is available in Supplementary Information Section B . Supplementary Information Figure B.1 

describes the encoder and decoder neural networks. Colour code: Polyhedron - Cu 2(𝜇 - COO) 4; Gray - C; Red - O; Blue - N; Yellow -S; White - H; Purple - metal-linker coordination motif). 

4Linker design and de novo MOF synthesis 

Unconstrained sampling draws latent vectors 𝑧 from the prior 𝑝 (𝑧 ) and decodes them autoregres-sively into new linkers, enabling global exploration of the learned linker distribution. In practice, however, only a small fraction of such samples remain compatible with the geometric constraints imposed by a chosen node-net template and with application-driven design objectives. We therefore use Nexerra 𝑅 1 as a controllable generator via seeded inference: we encode a known linker ( 𝑥 0)into a local latent distribution 𝑞 𝜙 (𝑧 |𝑥 0), sample the neighbourhood of its embedding, and decode analogues that preserve the seed chemotype while exploring nearby functionalization and shape space. We couple this localized sampling to post-hoc ranking under user-defined reward functions (denoted 𝑅 ), retaining the highest-scoring candidates ( X∗ = 𝑇 𝑜 𝑝𝐾 (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑅 )). Supplementary Information Section F shows the theoretical basis and formulation of these functions. Importantly, the generative model is not updated by the reward; 𝑅 is used solely to select designs. We implement seeded inference in two complementary modes ( Figure 2a , Supple-mentary Information Section G ). In ‘direct design’, the entire seed ( 𝑥 0) is allowed to vary. From the encoded neighbourhood of 𝑥 0, we generate a local library {𝑥 𝑘 }, assemble each linker on the chosen reticular template, and retain the 𝑇 𝑜 𝑝𝐾 candidates under 𝑅 . This mode is most effective for low-connectivity, i.e., highly-symmetric systems where the node geometry and linker connectivity largely determine topology. Using MOF-5 as a template and 1,4-benezenedicarboxylate (BDC) as a seed, we obtained 29 linker designs satisfying 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 > 0.75 × 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 (𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 ) – 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 being a function formulated for identifying exceptional linkers for gas storage (derived in Supplementary Information Section F ). We could assemble nearly all candidates on the pcu net, yielding multiple clean, force-field optimized frameworks. Figure 2b shows 6 such designed MOFs ( 𝜙 1 − 𝜙 6) after cleaning and optimization; Supplementary Information Section G.1 shows the direct design approach applied to other classes of bidentate and tridentate linkers. For high-connectivity frameworks, direct design becomes unreliable because small perturbations in the latent space can distort rigid, highly symmetric scaffolds that are essential for preserving topology. We, therefore, introduce a second design strategy, ‘scaffold-constrained design’ ( Figure 2a ), in which the linker is decomposed as 𝑥 = (𝑠, 𝑎 ), where 𝑠 represents a fixed core scaffold, and 𝑎 represents variable arms. During generation, we preserve the scaffold and sample only the arms, allowing Nexerra 𝑅 1 to explore functionalization and pore-environment chemistry while preserving the connectivity and geometry required for framework assembly. We apply this strategy to porphyrinic Zr 6-oxo systems using PCN-222 as a template. Starting from the tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCPP) linker, Nexerra 𝑅 1 diversifies linker chemistry while retaining the porphyrin core, enabling targeted modulation of the pore-environment without violating topology-critical geometry ( Figure 2c ). Among the top-ranked candidates (filtered using 

𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 ), several could be assembled and optimized on csq and ftw nets. Figure 2c shows four such designed MOFs ( 𝜙 7 − 𝜙 10 ); Supplementary Information Section G.2 shows this approach applied to other linkers. Notably, the Hf 6-oxo analogue of one such ftw design was synthesised as CU-525 (CU = Cambridge University), a variant of MOF-525 ( Figure 2d ). This result demonstrates that scaffold-constrained generative design can yield synthetically accessible, highly porous frameworks whose internal chemistry can be tailored for function. Single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD) data were collected and the crystal structure of CU-525 was successfully determined on the micro-focus beamline PROXIMA 2A at Synchrotron SOLEIL (for experimental details, see Supplementary Information Section H ). Although this seeded approach concentrates sampling relative to unconstrained generation, it still relies on random exploration followed by ranking. The learned 5Figure 2: Linker design. a. Nexerra 𝑅 1 enables inference in two modes: direct design and scaffold-constrained design. In direct design, Nexerra 𝑅 1 fully maps the seed to new linkers while in scaffold-constrained design, the scaffold is fixed, and the model generates new arms that are symmetrically grafted to the core. b. Using MOF-5 as a design template, Nexerra 𝑅 1 generates a library of linkers which are the filtered and scored by a reward function (R). 𝜙 1 − 𝜙 6 are 6 representative MOFs that were successfully assembled with the Zr 4O node on the pcu net. c. Using PCN-222 as a design template, 𝜙 7 − 𝜙 10 are 4 representative MOFs that were assembled with the Zr 6-oxo node. Since several topologies can be targeted (depending on geometric and topological constraints), we were able to successfully assemble candidates into the 8-connected csq net and the 12-connected ftw net. d. 𝜙 11 assembled on a ftw net was experimentally synthesized as CU-525. (Colour code: Polyhedron (Purple) – Zn 4O(COO) 6; Polyhedron (Blue) – Zr 6(𝜇 3-O) 4(𝜇 3-OH) 4(COO) 8(OH/H 2O) 4; Gray - C; Red - O; Blue - N; Yellow - S; White - H) 

prior reflects the empirical distribution of the training data rather than the structural requirements of a given application. Consequently, sampling from this prior – even when guided by seeds – remains inefficient when targeting linkers with specific geometric or physicochemical attributes. 

## Flow-guided design 

To address this sampling inefficiency, we developed a flow model – Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow – that implements a continuous normalizing flow in the latent space of Nexerra 𝑅 1 (Figure 3a ) (Tong et al., 2023). The flow defines a time-dependent, invertible transformation by learning a vector field 

𝑣 𝜃 (𝑧, 𝑡 ; 𝑐 ) that transports latent samples ( 𝑧 ) from a base distribution 𝑝 0 to a target distribution 𝑞 1;conditioning is introduced using a scalar variable 𝑐 (Lipman et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2023). Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow is trained using optimal-transport conditional flow matching (OT-CFM); an optimal transport coupling ( 𝜋 ) is computed between minibatches from 𝑝 0 and 𝑞 1, and intermediate points 𝑥 𝑡 together with conditional velocities 𝑣 𝑡 are sampled along the corresponding displacement interpolation path. 6A neural ordinary differential equation (ODE) is then trained to match these velocities, allowing probability mass to be redistributed toward the target regime without modifying the underlying CLM (for mathematical formulation, see Supplementary Information Section I.1 ). This flow formulation is inherently reward-agnostic; 𝑞 1 can be biased toward arbitrary scalar objectives. The difficulty of this transport, however, reflects the intrinsic geometry of the objective in the latent space. Fragmented or non-smooth reward landscapes produce more complex transport dynamics – making the training process more difficult. The linker length (defined by us as the maximum anchor – anchor span) presents a 

Figure 3: Flow-guided design. a. Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow learns a vector field 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑧, 𝑡 ; 𝑐 ) that transports latent samples from a base distribution 𝑝 0 to a target distribution 𝑞 1 under the formulation of optimal-transport conditional flow matching (a detailed theoretical description of the model is available in Supplementary Information Section I.1 ). b. Linker span distributions of molecules sampled from the training dataset (n = 10,000), Nexerra 𝑅 1 (n = 10,000) and Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow (n = 10,000). The typical generated linker from Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow is 2.4 Å longer compared to the training dataset and 1.7 Å longer compared to Nexerra 𝑅 1. c. Using 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid as the seed, Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow generates several optimal linkers with a longer span; the best-ranked linker has a span of 10.63 Å which is 1.8 × the span of the seed. The corresponding generated structures are presented in Supplementary Information Section I.4 .

physically interpretable descriptor. Increasing the span helps maximise accessible pore volume, lending itself to applications such as improved gravimetric gas storage and heterogeneous catalysis (Chen et al., 2020, 2025b; Le et al., 2026). Starting from an empirical latent prior 𝑝 0, we train 7Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow toward a target distribution biased towards longer spans by progressively increasing percentile thresholds. Specifically, over 200,000 steps, the target region was annealed from the 70 𝑡ℎ 

to the 95 𝑡ℎ percentile of the anchor – anchor span distribution (for training and evaluation, see 

Supplementary Information Section I.3 ). This progressively biases generation toward longer linker spans. Figure 3b shows span distributions of the linkers sampled from the training dataset, Nexerra 𝑅 1 and Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow respectively. While Nexerra 𝑅 1 reproduces the marginal distributions of the training dataset (KL(Train || VAE) ≈ 0.10), there is a marked shift in the distribution generated by the flow model (KL(Train || Flow) ≈ 0.42). Notably, the median length sampled from Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow is right-shifted by 2.4 Å compared to the training dataset and by 1.7 Å compared to Nexerra 𝑅 1.There is a large population of generated linkers that exceed 10 Å in span. As an illustrative example, using the 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid linker (BDC) as a seed, Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow generated several linkers that outperform it pursuant to a 𝑅 that prioritises length. Figure 3c shows several optimal candidates generated by Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow subject to strict geometrical filters to enable assembly into the fcu net; Supplementary Figure I.3 shows the generated structures post-optimization. Notably, Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow was able to scale the linker span from 5.76 Å for the seed to over 10.6 Å for the best generated candidate. To evaluate whether flow-guided latent transport translates into application-relevant performance gains, we simulated methane adsorption at 298 K and 80 bar using grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) simulations on the optimized frameworks assembled on the fcu net from the designed linkers discussed above (for computational details, see Supplementary Information Section J ). Figure 4 presents the gravimetric versus volumetric methane uptake landscape of the generated frameworks relative to UiO-66. The structures were able to achieve a systematic displacement of uptakes towards the upper-right region of the performance space; in other words, we were able to achieve a concurrent increase in both volumetric and gravimetric uptake – two typically competing metrics within a fixed topology (Chen et al., 2020, 2025b). While UiO-66 occupies a relatively moderate capacity (0.102 g/g gravimetric uptake; 173 cm 3 (STP)/cm 3 volumetric uptake), several generated MOFs significantly outperform the material. The two best-performing candidates – 𝜙 13 and 𝜙 23 – achieve gravimetric uptakes of 0.191 g/g and 0.179 g/g and volumetric uptakes of 203 cm 3 (STP)/cm 3 and 219 cm 3 (STP)/cm 3, respectively. These represent up to an 87% increase in gravimetric and 27% increase in volumetric uptake relative to UiO-66. These results establish that latent-space flow transport can efficiently bias reticular design toward high-performance regions of the materials space without altering topology. More broadly, the platform is not restricted to gas storage. Since the design objective only enters through the reward function R, alternate application-specific targets can be incorporated without modifying the underlying generative prior. As an illustrative example, building on our recent work on the computational design of MOFs for drug delivery (Menon and Fairen-Jimenez, 2025; Melle et al., 2025), in Supplementary Information Section F.2 we develop a modular reward function R𝑏𝑖𝑜 for the design of biocompatible, high-performance linkers. This highlights how the same platform can be adapted to steer generative reticular chemistry to diverse functional regimes. Future work will couple high-ranked designs with experimental synthesis and characterisation for a direct assessment of the predictive power of flow-guided latent transport – ultimately, enabling accelerated reticular materials discovery. 8Figure 4: Flow-guided inverse design of UiO-66 analogues for methane storage. Gravimetric versus volumetric methane uptake at 298 K and 80 bar calculated using GCMC simulations for fcu frameworks assembled from Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow designed linkers (BDC seed). Several candidates simultaneously exceed UiO-66 in both volumetric and gravimetric uptake. The distributional steering achived by Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow enables concurrent improvements in storage performance as shown in the darker shaded region. Insets show representative high-performing optimized structures. (Colour code: Polyhedron – Zr 6(𝜇 3-O) 4(𝜇 3-OH) 4(COO) 12 ; Gray - C; Red -O; Blue - N; Yellow - S; White - H) 

## Outlook 

We have introduced a targeted, controllable approach towards inverse reticular chemistry in which chemical language modeling is coupled to latent-space transport to bias generation toward functional regimes. The developed formulation is inherently reward-agnostic and extensible to arbitrary scalar objectives, including multi-objective applications potentially spanning adsorption selectivity, mechanical stability, catalytic turnover or drug delivery. A central implication of our work is the decoupling of representation learning from objective steering. By maintaining a fixed generative prior over the linker space and learning an optimal-transport map in latent space, we enable targeted redistribution of probability mass without the need for retraining. This allows application-specific 9design while preserving the structural grammar of reticular assembly. As such, the approach provides a general strategy for navigating constrained chemical design spaces where topology, symmetry and connectivity impose non-trivial geometric priors. We foresee that future developments will expand this methodology to joint linker–node optimization enabling the exploration of heterogeneous metal environments and mixed-node systems. Coupling latent transport to topological selection may further permit controlled navigation across nets, enabling simultaneous optimization of geometry and composition rather than operating within a fixed reticular scaffold. More broadly, as generative models become increasingly expressive and property evaluations increasingly automated, such approaches will provide a scalable route toward autonomous design of crystalline materials (Rong et al., 2025). We anticipate that platforms such as Nexerra 𝑅 1 will accelerate the transition from intuition-driven synthesis to programmable reticular engineering, where application-specific materials are generated, assembled and validated within a unified computational-experimental pipeline. 

## Data Availability 

The crystallography data in this work have been deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre (CCDC) under accession number CCDC: 2514566 (CU-525). This data can be obtained free of charge from CCDC via www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/data_request/cif. 

## Code Availability 

The code for Nexerra 𝑅 1 is available at https://github.com/fairen-group/nexerra-r1 under an MIT license. This repository will be under continuous development. A stable version (including model weights) will be released upon publication. 

## Author Contributions 

D.M, O.M.Y and D.F-J conceived the idea. D.M led the model development with significant input from V.S, M.R.A.K and N.R. X.C experimentally synthesized CU-525. X.C. and W.S. collected SCXRD data and determined the X-ray crystal structure of CU-525. D.M and M.R.A.K performed the molecular simulations. D.M, H.W.M and I.Z formulated the reward functions. O.M.Y and D.F-J supervised the work. D.M wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Winton Cambridge – Berkeley Exchange Fellowship awarded to D.M. D.M acknowledges NanoDTC Cambridge – ESPSRC EP/S022953/1. M.R.A.K acknowledges support from the Cambridge Trust Scholarship and the Trinity Henry-Barlow Scholarship. H.W.M. acknowledges the Harding Distinguished Postgraduate Scholarship Programme. The authors acknowledge the allocation of beamtime at Synchrotron SOLEIL and the help of the PROXIMA 2A staff in performing SCXRD experiments. 10 Conflicts of Interests 

There are no conflicts to declare. 11 Supplementary Information 

Dhruv Menon 1, Vivek Singh 2,3,4 , Xu Chen 1, Mohammad Reza Alizadeh Kiapi 1, Ivan Zyuzin 1, Hamish W. Macleod 1, Nakul Rampal 2,3,4 , William Shepard 5, Omar M. Yaghi 2,3,4 and David Fairen-Jimenez 1,* 

> 1

Department of Chemical Engineering & Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, University of California – Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 

> 3

Bakar Institute of Digital Materials for the Planet, Berkeley, CA, USA 

> 4

KACST–UC Berkeley Center of Excellence for Nanomaterials for Clean Energy Applications, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 

> 5

Synchrotron SOLEIL-UR1, L’Orme des Merisiers, Départementale 128, 91190 Saint-Aubin, France 

March 19, 2026 

Corresponding author(s): df334@cam.ac.uk 

© 2026 The Authors. All rights reserved Supplementary Section A. Edge-transitive nets and compatible nodes 

MOF structures can be described as periodic graphs (or nets) with coordination between nodes (vertex) and spacers (edges) (Guillerm et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2014). In such a representation, framework assembly involves embedding this topological graph into Euclidean space under strict geometric and chemical constraints. Not all nets therefore, correspond to achievable design targets due to topological symmetry and connectivity heterogeneity – which, in turn, complicates algorithmic assembly and synthesizability. We thus, focus on nets that are edge-transitive, i.e., edges which are symmetry-equivalent; each edge has identical local coordination and geometric identity (Jiang et al., 2021). These nets offer several advantages for inverse design. First, they require only a single type of linker, eliminating the combinatorial complexity of multivariate systems. Second, the geometric constraints are uniform, i.e., connectivity, span and orientation are consistent. Third, MOFs based on such nets are easier to experimentally synthesize. Notably, this constraint does not come at the expense of diversity; there are theoretically infinite structures possible on edge-transitive nets, forming a vast chemical space. A second constraint we impose is the use of zero-periodic metal-cluster building blocks (MBBs). These MBBs (such as Zr 6-oxo, Cu 2-paddlewheel, Zn 4O) have well-defined topological coordination behavior, making algorithmic assembly tractable. Such MBBs have led to the development of several chemically stable MOFs with well-defined properties (Jiang et al., 2021; Guillerm et al., 2025). In contrast, supramolecular building blocks (SBBs) (Guillerm et al., 2014), extended metal-chains (Jiang et al., 2024b) or merged-net approaches (Jiang et al., 2024a) introduce multiple additional degrees of freedom which drastically complicate algorithmic assembly and thus, inverse design. For detailed discussions on edge-transitive nets, MBBs and principles involving targeting such nets, we refer readers to some excellent reviews from Mohammed Eddaoudi’s group (Guillerm et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2021; Guillerm et al., 2014). The successful assembly of nodes and designed edges on a target net would necessitate compatibility with geometric constraints. This would involve the connectivity of the linker being compatible with the target net, the span and orientation of the linker being within a reasonable range of the target values and the absence of steric clashes that would prevent coordination or lead to overlapping atoms. Certain nets such as pcu and fcu are much easier to target due to lower topological constraints, while nets with higher symmetry such as csq are more difficult. Consequently, these ‘simpler’ nets will have higher success rates for assembly compared to the ‘difficult’ nets. Most nodes we explore here have coordination numbers ranging from 6 – 12 which include clusters such as Zr 6-oxo (seen in UiO-66, PCN-222) and Cu 2-paddlewheels (seen in HKUST-1). Our present work, therefore, does not address: (i) multi-linker or multi-edge nets (Jiang et al., 2024b); (ii) mixed-node systems; (iii) merged nets (Jiang et al., 2024a); (iv) periodic SBUs (Chen et al., 2025a); and (v) interpenetrated structures (Gupta and Vittal, 2021). We foresee that future work will expand to the joint optimization of node geometry and improved algorithmic assembly, enabling the targeting of such complex nets. 

## Supplementary Section B. Nexerra 𝑅 1 architecture 

B.1. Sequence representation and SELFIES. Nexerra 𝑅 1 is developed on molecular linkers represented as a sequence of tokens. The model is trained to predict the next token in a sequence given an initial set of tokens ( Supplementary Figure B.1.a-b ). Sequence representation is thus crucial to the development of a robust language model. We chose SELFIES (SELF-referencing 13 embedded string) (Krenn et al., 2022) as a string-based molecular representation for developing Nexerra 𝑅 1. The key advantage of SELFIES is that it is built on a formal grammar which guarantees chemical validity of generated sequences – which is a known problem of conventionally employed representations such as SMILES strings, especially on long sequences. For discussions on these formulated grammar rules and working principles of SELFIES, we refer readers to parent publications from Aspuru-Guzik and colleagues (Krenn et al., 2020, 2022). Supplementary Figure B.1.b shows the SELFIES string of a representative linker. The SELFIES string (say 𝑥 ) is subsequently decomposed into a sequence of discrete tokens drawn from a finite (defined) vocabulary 𝑉 , where each token corresponds to a structural unit. Let 

𝑥 = (𝑥 1, ..., 𝑥 𝐿 ), 𝑥 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 (B.1) denote the resulting tokenization of a SELFIES string. We append start-of-sequence ‘[SOS]’, end-of-sequence ‘[EOS]’ and padding ‘[PAD]’ symbols to enable autoregressive training. Each sequence is padded to a fixed maximum length (102 tokens) with the [PAD] symbol masked during training and inference. 

B.2. 𝛽 -VAE. Nexerra 𝑅 1 is formulated as a 𝛽 -VAE with transformer-based encoder and decoder networks ( Supplementary Figure B.1.c-e ). While detailed mathematical motivations on the VAE and transformer networks remain outside the remit of present work - instead read (Kingma and Welling, 2013; Vaswani et al., 2017) -, we formulate the working principles of the architecture. Given the token sequence 𝑥 from (Equation 𝐵. 1), we introduce a continuous latent variable 𝑧 as follows, 

𝑧 ∈ R𝑑 𝑧 ; 𝑑 𝑧 = 128 (B.2) The probabilistic latent variable model defines, 

𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥, 𝑧 ) = 𝑝 (𝑧 ) 𝑝 (𝑥 |𝑧 ) (B.3) with a Gaussian prior 

𝑝 (𝑧 ) = N ( 0, 𝐼 ) (B.4) The transformer encoder maps these sequences to contextualized embeddings to produce a fixed-dimensional representation ( Supplementary Figure B.1.c ). From this, the approximate posterior is parameterized as follows, 

𝑞 𝜙 (𝑧 |𝑥 ) = N



𝑧 ; 𝜇 𝜙 (𝑥 ), 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔 (𝜎 2 

> 𝜙

(𝑥 )) 



(B.5) The latent samples can be drawn from the posterior using the reparameterization trick, 

𝑧 = 𝜇 𝜙 (𝑥 ) + 𝜎 𝜙 (𝑥 ) ⊙ 𝜖 ; 𝜖 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼 ) (B.6) The transformer decoder ( Supplementary Figure B.1.e ) – conditioned on 𝑧 – defines an autoregressive likelihood, 

𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 |𝑧 ) = Π 𝐿 𝑡 =1 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 |𝑥 <𝑡 , 𝑧 ) (B.7) We linearly project 𝑧 from the latent space to the model space, and input it to the decoder via the cross-attention mechanism. The model parameters are optimized using a 𝛽 -weighted evidence lower bound (ELBO), 

L = E𝑞 𝜙 (𝑧 |𝑥 ) [𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 |𝑧 )] − 𝛽𝐷 𝐾 𝐿 

 𝑞 𝜙 (𝑧 |𝑥 )|| 𝑝 (𝑧 ) (B.8) 14 For reconstruction, we implemented a cross entropy loss with masked tokens. During training, to prevent posterior collapse, we gradually anneal the 𝛽 -term starting from 0 during a warmup phase. Post-warmup, the 𝛽 is held at a fixed value for the rest of the training. Due to the powerful learning capabilities of the transformer neural network, we find 𝛽 = 0.01 to be an optimum value for stable training (for training curves, see Supplementary Information Section D ). 

B.3. Transformer encoder and decoder. Both the encoder and decoder are implemented as stacks of transformer layers ( Supplementary Figure B.1 ). We use a standard implementation of the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). Given token embeddings, each encoder layer applies multi-head self-attention, 

𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉 ) = 𝑠𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑄.𝐾 𝑇 √︁ 

(𝑑 𝑘 )

!

𝑉 (B.9) followed by the conventional feedforward network and residual connections. Here, 𝐾, 𝑄, 𝑉 are the key, query and values, respectively, and 𝑑 𝑘 is the dimension of keys. In our context, the self-attention mechanism allows each token to attend to all others in the sequence – thereby capturing long-range structural dependencies within the linker. This is particularly important for MOF linkers which often have extended conjugation and coordination motifs where geometric relationships cannot easily be captured. The decoder too retains the attention-based working, but incorporates masked self-attention to preserve its autoregressive nature. In other words, we mask future tokens so that the decoder cannot ‘cheat’. We condition on the latent variable using cross-attention. We chose transformer networks for our architecture due to their ability to model long-range interactions and accommodate longer context windows without degradation. This is evidenced by high per-token reconstruction accuracies for a 102-token window. That being said, such ar-chitectures are not without their share of problems. The powerful learning capabilities require strong control over model hyperparameters to prevent memorization, while the high expressivity necessitates strong geometrical and chemical filters coupled with reward functions to generate desirable linkers. 

B.4. Inference. At inference, during unconstrained sampling, new linkers are generated by sam-pling from the learned latent prior, 𝑧 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼 ) followed by the autoregressive decoding of tokens described in Equation 𝐵. 7. To control the extent of diversity (i.e., how similar or different samples be) we scale the generated logits by a temperature parameter 𝑇 (> 0). Lower values make the distribution sharper – i.e., less diversity – while higher values increase diversity. We get best results at 𝑇 = 0.8, however sampling is flexible. To prevent sampling logits with extremely low probability (which lead to sub-optimal gen-erated linkers) we perform nucleus (or top-p) sampling ( Supplementary Figure B.1.f ) (Holtzman et al., 2019). This means that at 𝑝 = 0.9, at each step, we only perform sampling on the subset of tokens whose cumulative probability mass exceeds 0.9. This eliminates sub-optimal tokens from consideration – improving inference stability. Inference continues until we hit an ‘[EOS]’ token or reach the maximum token limit of 102. Since SELFIES enforces validity, all generated molecules are syntactically and semantically valid. Following sampling, we implement a post-processing algorithm that optimizes the place-ment of coordination anchors – i.e., the [Lr] token. This algorithm is described in Supplementary Information Section E . Moreover, what we have described here is unconstrained sampling. A 15 Supplementary Figure B.1. Nexerra 𝑅 1 architecture. a. MOF structures are represented as nodes and edges. As a first step, we decouple the design process at the building-block level. b. Linkers are encoded as molecular strings and tokenized into a sequence of symbols. c. The encoder network of the model is composed of a stack of transformer layers that map tokenized vectors in one representation space into a corresponding set of vectors in a new space, and by doing so, learn a rich internal representation. The 

𝑙 × 𝑏 dataset ( 𝑙 = number of tokens; 𝑏 = number of samples) is first embedded and subsequently undergoes position encoding (PE) to capture sequence order. This embedded tensor is then passed to the transformer stack which applies the self-attention mechanism to capture long-range interactions. d. The VAE acts as a bottleneck wherein the encoder defines an approximate posterior over a low-dimensional continuous latent variable ( 𝑧 ), while the decoder reconstructs the original sequence from 𝑧 . e The decoder is again composed of a stack of transformer layers that projects the latent representation back into high-dimensional data and outputs logits of the vocabulary size (vocab). Here we implement masked self-attention to prevent the decoder from seeing future tokens during training. We condition it on the latent variable using cross-attention. f. Nucleus sampling is used to generate new linkers from the decoder output. g. Subject to chemical validity, an attempt is made to assemble the new linker into the target net (Color code: Polyhedron - Cu 2(𝜇 -COO 4); Gray - C; Red - O; Blue - N; Yellow - S; White - H; Purple - [Lr]) 

16 more efficient methodology involves seed-guided design (as introduced in the main manuscript). These design methods have been described in Supplementary Information Section G .

## Supplementary Section C. Dataset curation and generation 

While there is a lack of consensus on how much data is required to train CLMs (Frey et al., 2023; Skinnider et al., 2021), when it comes to specific domains such as MOF linkers, datasets spanning 

10 5 − 10 6 samples generally yield good results (Yao et al., 2021). Starting from the dataset reported by Yao et al. (2021), we extracted ∼ 80,000 unique molecules (as SMILES). In order to expand the dataset, we implemented a randomized monovalent functionalization protocol to augment SMILES data. Algorithm C.1 details the developed functionalization protocol. Briefly, for each original molecule: we identified heavy-atom sites bearing hydrogens, randomly selected a replaceable site, removed one hydrogen and appended a fragment from a curated list ( Supplementary Figure C.1 )by combining the parent and fragment molecules, forming a single bond at the attachment site. Each generated molecule is then sanitized using an open-source cheminformatics library (Rdkit) (Landrum et al., 2016) and discarded if this sanitization or valence checks fails. To favor synthetically accessible modifications – candidates with SCScore > 4.75 were discarded. Each molecule from the original dataset undergoes up to 20 such attempts (to compensate for rejected modifications) and up to 3 monovalent functionalization steps per attempt (number of attempts selected at random). The resulting molecules were canonicalized and filtered for duplicates. This ultimately yielded a final training corpus of 898,677 unique molecules. Given the scale of the dataset, although we do not have precise control over the quality of each generated molecule, the rigid SCScore cutoff and the sanitization and canonicalization protocols are expected to ensure that poor quality molecules are eliminated. 

Supplementary Figure C.2 shows distributions of molecular properties for the extended dataset post-functionalization (n = 200,000). The heavy atom count distribution is roughly unimodal, with most linkers in the medium-large regime (i.e., ∼ 20 – 30 heavy atoms) and relatively few short linkers (< 10 heavy atoms). Accordingly, the model is expected to learn medium-large linkers best, with limited support for very short linkers. The logP follows a bell-shaped curve – spanning both polar and hydrophobic linkers, and centered in a moderately lipophilic regime. Seeing no massive spikes at extreme ends is encouraging as it indicates that the data is not biased towards extremely polar or lipophilic molecules and covers a healthy range. The SCScore distribution is also reasonable – with the dataset explicitly biased away from extremely difficult linkers (i.e. scores > 4.75). There is a broad peak around 2 – 4, with very few molecules in the hyper-trivial regions (scores near 1). There is thus, a meaningful spread of synthetic difficulty – capturing  

> Supplementary Figure C.1 List of fragments used to randomly functionalize linkers to expand the training corpus

17 what one would expect for MOF linkers. For rotatable bond counts (as a proxy for flexibility), the distribution is concentrated towards ∼ 5 - 10 rotatable bonds, with a tail > 20 and some entries close to 0. There is a mix of rigid, semi-rigid and flexible linkers (here, it is expected that func-tionalization would have increased these counts) – but the distribution is not overly skewed. The molecular weight distribution is also unimodal – capturing small bidentate to complex multidentate linkers. Overall, while functionalization gently skews some properties, the resulting distribu-tions are smooth, unimodal and span chemical sensible ranges, yielding broad coverage biased towards medium-large, moderately flexible, moderately lipophilic, yet synthetically tractable linkers. 

Algorithm C1: Dataset generation 

Input: Parent molecule set M0 = {𝑚 1, . . . , 𝑚 𝑁 };Fragment set F = { 𝑓 1, . . . , 𝑓 𝐾 };Maximum attempts 𝐴 = 20 ;Maximum substitutions per attempt 𝑆 max = 3;Synthetic complexity (SCScore) threshold 𝜏 = 4.75 

Output: Augmented molecule set M𝑎𝑢𝑔 

Initialize M𝑎𝑢𝑔 ← ∅ 

foreach 𝑚 ∈ M 0 do 

Identify eligible attachment sites: 

H ( 𝑚 ) = {𝑎 ∈ HeavyAtoms (𝑚 ) | HydrogenCount (𝑎 ) ≥ 1}

for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝐴 do 

𝑚 ′ ← 𝑚 

Sample number of substitutions: 

𝑠 ∼ Uniform {1, . . . , 𝑆 max }

for 𝑗 = 1 to 𝑠 do 

Randomly select attachment site: 

𝑎 ∼ Uniform (H ( 𝑚 ′)) 

Randomly select fragment: 

𝑓 ∼ Uniform (F ) 

Remove one hydrogen from 𝑎 

Form single bond between 𝑎 and attachment atom of 𝑓 

Sanitize 𝑚 ′ (valence check, RDKit sanitization) 

if sanitization fails then break if sanitization succeeds and SCScore (𝑚 ′) ≤ 𝜏 then 

Canonicalize 𝑚 ′; Add 𝑚 ′ to M𝑎𝑢𝑔 

Remove duplicates from M𝑎𝑢𝑔 return M𝑎𝑢𝑔 

Supplementary Figure C.3 shows UMAP embeddings of linkers from the training dataset (Morgan fingerprints, radius 2, 2048 bits, n = 50000) coloured by logP, molecular weight and rotatable bond count – providing a complementary view of the corpus. The linkers occupy a single, coherent 18 Supplementary Figure C.2 Distributions of molecular properties – (from left to right) heavy atom count, logP, SCScore, rotatable bond count and molecular weight – for the extended dataset (n = 200,000 sampled randomly from a total 898,677 molecules). Note: The steep cliff observed in the SCScore distribution at large values is because we have filtered values exceeding 4.75 during the functionalization process. 

manifold with only a few small satellite regions, suggesting that the training data forms a connected chemical space rather than several isolated clusters. This suggests that the training distribution is continuous rather than being disjoint into isolated clusters (although some satellites do exist on the UMAP plot). Such distributions are favourable for models that rely on interpolation in the latent space. Variations in logP, size and flexibility are distributed across this manifold. There is some degree of qualitative visual coincidence between higher molecular weights and increased rotatable-bond counts, as expected for functionalised multidentate linkers. Regions with extreme values of these properties are present but relatively sparse and remain embedded within the main manifold, in agreement with the one-dimensional descriptor distributions ( Supplementary Figure C.2 ).  

> Supplementary Figure C.3 UMAP visualization of the training corpus (n = 50,000, Morgan fingerprints, radius 2, 2048 bits). Colored by (left-right) logP, molecular weight and rotatable bond counts. Note: The colors have been normalized for each property class.

Across the ∼ 900,000 linker corpus, we identified ∼ 103,000 unique Bemis-Murcko scaffolds – representing an ∼ 11% uniqueness. Among these, the top 50 scaffolds ( Supplementary Figure C.4 ) account for 30% of all linkers, implying that ∼ 0.05% of scaffolds – representing a small number of chemically simple cores – are reused, while the remaining cores have a longer tail of rarer, more complex motifs, not captured among the common cores. The commonly observed scaffolds are dominated by benzenoid and N-heterocyclic cores together with a few biaryl and fused aromatic systems, typical in MOF chemistry. The scaffold distribution provides frequent analogues on well-known MOF cores but also implies a bias towards these cores, with less statistical support for under-represented (complex) scaffold families. However, we anticipate that the scaffold-constrained design approach (discussed in the main manuscript) should be able to mitigate some of these biases. 19 Supplementary Figure C.4 The 50 most commonly observed Murcko scaffolds from the training dataset accounting for ∼ 30% of the entire corpus. Ranked in decreasing order of prevalence from left-right, top-bottom. 

## Supplementary Section D. Model training & evaluation 

Nexerra 𝑅 1 was trained over 172 epochs, with early stopping selecting a checkpoint around 120 epochs. Supplementary Figure D.1 shows the training logs – which exhibit behavior consistent with stable training. The total and reconstruction loss rapidly decreases over the first few epochs. The slight increase in total loss in the 50 – 100 epoch range coincides with an increase in the 

𝛽 -weight assigned to the KL term in the loss function. Around the similar epoch-range, the KL loss exhibits a steep jump (corresponding to KL-free learning schedule) before gradually decreasing and stabilizing. The KL loss stabilizing at ∼ 25 is encouraging as it indicates that the model avoids posterior collapse, thanks to the 𝛽 -warmup scheduler. This indicates that the latent space has meaningfully regularized and has not degenerated into a purely deterministic autoencoder. Parallelly, 20 the per-token reconstruction accuracy jumps from ∼ 20% to > 90% over the initial stage of training, following which it gradually stabilizes to ∼ 96.5% over the training duration. For samples drawn during the training process, the internal diversity also stabilizes to slightly > 0.925, which is close to what we observed for the training dataset, another encouraging sign. As for the novelty of these sampled molecules, it lies in the healthy 96 – 99.5% range. The small fraction of exact reconstructions (causing the slight dip in novelty) is consistent with the models ability to reproduce training-like linkers while still generating predominantly novel molecules. Overall, the training logs support a non-degenerate representation of the MOF linker space that is capable of generating novel linkers. 

> Supplementary Figure D.1 . The training logs measured over 172 epochs indicate stable training. (First row, left to right): Total loss, reconstruction loss and KL loss. (Second row: left to right): Per-token reconstruction accuracy, internal diversity of sampled molecules and novelty of sampled molecules (n = 5000).

Beyond training metrics, a key test for a generative model is its ability to reproduce the property distributions of the data it is trained on. Using 10,000 molecules sampled from the model and 10,000 molecules randomly sampled from a previously unseen test set, Supplementary Figure D.2 shows distributions for logP, fraction of sp 3 Carbons (Fraction Csp 3) and the total polar surface area (TPSA). For logP, the generated and test distributions are both unimodal and centred in the same region. The generated molecules show a slight right-shift towards more hydrophobic molecules with a longer tail – but the bulk of the probability mass overlaps (KL ∼ 0.055). For fraction Csp 3 –both distributions span the full 0-1 range. While the test set is more concentrated at the extremes, the generated distribution is flatter. That being said, the KL divergence of 0.078 is modest. As for the TPSA, both distributions have an excellent match with a very low KL divergence (KL ∼ 0.028). Taken together, the model is able to reproduce marginal distributions of key descriptors very well. There are minor deviations, but these effects are confined to distribution tails. Next, to assess the continuity of the learned latent representation, we projected 50,000 21 Supplementary Figure D.2 . Distributions for (left to right) logP, fraction Csp 3 and TPSA for generated molecules (n = 10,000) and a non-redundant subset of the test set (n = 10,000). The annotated text represents the KL divergence between the two distributions. A KL divergence of 0.0 would indicate a perfect match (the ideal case). 

training embeddings and 49,950 samples drawn from the latent prior into a shared UMAP embedding (Supplementary Figure D.3 ). The generated samples closely overlap the empirical manifold without forming explicitly disjoint clusters or major regions outside the training manifold. This suggests that the VAE prior captures a coherent chemical distribution and that unconstrained sampling remains within the support of the learned latent space. 

> Supplementary Figure D.3 . UMAP visualization of the latent embeddings of training molecules (gray, n = 50,000) and generated molecules (red, n = 49,950). The generated samples closely overlap the training manifold, although, there is mild clustering of generated molecules in some pockets. Additionally, there are no major pockets outside the training manifold, suggesting that sampling remains within the learned latent space.

Supplementary Figure D.4 shows examples that illustrate the structures Nexerra 𝑅 1 can access under free sampling from the prior. The model readily proposes multi-functional, high-connectivity linkers with extended aromatic cores and dense substitution patterns. This complexity reflects both the expressivity of the language model and its large context window (up to 102 tokens), which allows it to coordinate long-range patterns such as symmetry, repeating units and 22 balanced placement of coordination groups along the backbone. However, we must stress that these are representative high-quality samples selected from a much larger pool: in unconstrained free sampling, the same expressive capacity also produces many molecules that are synthetically unappealing, poorly suited to MOF linkers, or simply off-target for the design objective. In other words, the model’s raw generative power does not automatically translate into an efficient ‘hit rate’ for good candidates. In practice, we therefore rely on seed-guided design, where a chemically reasonable linker template or scaffold is provided and the model is used to explore the chemical vicinity of this scaffold in the latent space pursuant to a reward function, to focus generation onto promising regions of linker space and substantially improve the efficiency of discovering useful linkers. 

> Supplementary Figure D.4 . Illustrative examples of molecules sampled freely from the prior of Nexerra 𝑅 1. The model is able to generate multi-functional, complex molecules with polyaromatic cores and dense substitution patterns. However, owing to the high expressivity of the CLM, under unconstrained sampling, the ‘hit rate’ for desirable linkers is low. Thus, seed-guided design serves as a more optimal route towards the discovery of exceptional linkers.

Finally, using the 10,000 linkers sampled from the latent prior, we computed standard distributional diagnostics. All generated molecules were chemically valid (validity = 1.00; as expected when using SELFIES), with negligible duplication (uniqueness = 0.99), indicating that the decoding is stable, with no mode collapse. Internal diversity remained high (IntDiv = 0.925), comparable to that of the training distribution, suggesting broad exploration of linker chemotypes. The average similarity to the nearest molecule (SNN) = 0.26, reflecting moderate structural proximity without memorization; this is also confirmed by the latent space embeddings ( Supplementary Figure D.3 )which show that the sampled molecules occupy the same chemical space as the training dataset. The scaffold diversity (Scaff = 0.92) confirms that linker generation is not confined to a narrow subset. 23 Put together, these metrics indicate that the learned latent prior captures a coherent and chemically diverse distribution, providing a stable foundation for subsequent distributional targeting via flow. 

## Supplementary Section E. Post-processing of linkers after generation 

Once generated, molecules are subjected to standard sanitization checks using RDKit (Landrum et al., 2016); these include valency checks, aromaticity and ring assignment checks. Should a generated molecule fail this, it is immediately discarded from any further consideration. This is however, rare, considering we use SELFIES representation for the model which guarantees validity. To coordinate with the metal-containing cluster (i.e., the node), the linker should have coordinating moieties. In practice, these are usually groups such as carboxylates, phosphonates, sulfonates or azolates. However, due to the nature of the MOF assembly algorithm (Colón et al., 2017) that we use, we instead denote these moieties using an ‘[Lr]’ token. Now, in addition to having these ‘[Lr]’ tokens, they must be placed onto the generated linker is a manner that ensures geometric and topological compatibility with the target net. First, we remove all existing ‘[Lr]’ tokens; in case this token is on a ring system, it is substituted with a Nitrogen atom. This resulting scaffold is then geometry optimized. The number of coordination handles to be placed either depend on the input seed (i.e., to match the coordination of the seed) or alternatively, can be specified by the user. In principle, the algorithm is agnostic to the number of such handles. Next, we embed the linker in Euclidean space and define candidate attachment sites as the set of carbon atoms with at least one removable hydrogen atom. Let 

𝑆 = {𝑠 1, ..., 𝑠 𝑛 } denote a set of 3D coordinates of these carbon atoms. In order to place 𝑘 anchors, we enumerate all possible 𝑘 candidate sites. For each candidate set 𝑆 𝑖 = {𝑠 𝑖 1 , ..., 𝑠 𝑖 𝑘 }, we calculate the mean pairwise separation as, 

Φ = 2

𝑘 (𝑘 − 1)∑︁ 𝑎<𝑏 

∥𝑟 𝑖 𝑎 − 𝑟 𝑖 𝑏 ∥ (E.1) We select the configuration that maximizes Φ. This favors spatially well-separated anchors with good linker geometries and low steric crowding. This works especially well for ditopic and tritopic linkers. Following the selection of these candidate sites, we remove one hydrogen from these specified Carbons and replace it with an ‘[Lr]’ token. Supplementary Figure E.1 describes the linker optimization workflow adopted. 

> Supplementary Figure E.1 . Starting with a generated linker, it is stripped out its ‘[Lr]’ handles, and optimised. Next, we collect a set of candidate attachment sites (described above) and select those sites which maximise the spatial separation between anchor points. We append the required ‘[Lr]’ handles to these selected sites. This workflow is in principle, agnostic to the number of handles.

24 Supplementary Section F. Reward functions 

The generative capabilities of Nexerra 𝑅 1 do not extend to the efficient discrimination of useful linkers – i.e., linkers with favorable properties – against linkers that are sub-optimal. Even with the addition of the flow model ( Supplementary Information Section I ), we are at best able to favor linker sampling against certain target properties (for instance, linker length). For most applications, we need to optimize several, often competing properties. We thus rely on reward functions that score linkers based on their utility for the application of interest. In this context, reward functions offer several advantages: (i) they are modular, i.e., they can be easily formulated for an application of interest to screen for desirable linkers; (ii) they are computationally cheap and do not require any additional model training; and (iii) they can span arbitrary complexity. On the downside, these functions rely on several simplifications and assumptions, and on the whole are tough to generalize. Functions formulated for a system of interest, may not necessarily work well for other systems. Nonetheless, the flexibility on offer enables access to vast design spaces that in principle, span multiple application landscapes. Here, as case studies, we formulate two reward functions targeting gas storage and biocompatibility. Before proceeding to the formulation of these functions, we preface the discussion by clarifying that these functions operate completely at the linker-level and do not explicitly account for metal-node and topology effects, host-guest interactions, and framework flexibility. These characteristics undoubtedly play critical roles in the overall performance, and can be evaluated using geometric analysis and molecular simulations on assembled frameworks. The goal here is to de-velop computationally lightweight structural filters to bias generation towards desirable chemotypes. 

F.1. Gas storage. In the design of adsorbents for gas storage (e.g., H 2, CH 4), the deliverable capacity is a critical design parameter (Chen et al., 2020). Here, the gravimetric uptake – mass of adsorbate taken up per unit mass of adsorbent – and the volumetric uptake – mass of adsorbate taken up per unit volume of adsorbent – are two equally important, yet competing metrics (Chen et al., 2020, 2025b). Design strategies need to focus on concurrently optimizing both objectives. At the linker level, several structural characteristics influence framework-level gas storage capabilities: (i) anchor-to-anchor span, which modulates the node-node separation and the pore size; (ii) molecular weight, which controls framework density; (iii) rigidity, which impacts disorder and framework collapse; and (iv) linker symmetry, which impacts the packing efficiency. Starting with gravimetric storage, the capacity benefits by maximizing accessible void volume per unit mass. To approximate this at the linker-level, we define a mass-normalized span descriptor as: 

𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠 −𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 −𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛 = 𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 −𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 

𝑀𝑊 (F.1) where, 𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 −𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 is the maximum anchor – anchor distance and MW is the molecular weight of the linker (excluding anchors). 𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠 −𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 −𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛 serves as a proxy for structural expansion per unit mass. This proxy – which is intended as a purely relative descriptor – biases generation towards longer, lightweight linkers. At the same time, such linkers tend to exhibit a high-degree of flexibility, which makes ultraporous frameworks susceptible to potential pore collapse. We therefore introduce a second descriptor 𝑑 𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 that penalizes flexible linkers that may promote framework collapse. The rigidity proxy is defined as follows: 

𝑑 𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 0.5 × 𝑅𝐵𝐶 + 0.5 × 𝑁 𝐶 𝑠 𝑝 3 (F.2) 25 where, 𝑅𝐵𝐶 is the fraction of the rotatable bonds in the linker and 𝑁 𝐶 𝑠 𝑝 3 is the fraction of 𝑠𝑝 3

Carbons in the linker. Put together, the gravimetric reward ( 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 ) is defined as follows: 

𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 = 𝛼 1 𝐷 (𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 −𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 ) + 𝛼 2 𝐷 (𝑑 𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) + 𝛼 3 𝐷 (𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠 −𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 −𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛 ) (F.3) where, 𝐷 denotes bounded desirability functions that prevent extreme values from distorting the reward scores while enabling smoother interpolations; 𝛼 1, 𝛼 2, 𝛼 3 denote the relative weights assigned to each term. In the case of the mass-normalized span descriptor, 𝐷 is an increasing sigmoidal function centered around the 75 𝑡ℎ percentile of the distribution from the sampled training set ( Supplementary Figure F.1.a ). Due to the strong regularization effect of this descriptor that penalizes heavy linkers, it is assigned a lower weightage of 0.2. For the flexibility descriptor, 𝐷 is a decreasing sigmoidal function centered around 0.5, with a width of 0.2. For the span descriptor, 𝐷 is an increasing sigmoidal function centered around 16 Å, with a width of 4 Å. Overall, 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 encodes structural priors that support lightweight, long-span, shape-persistent linkers. Supplementary Figure F.1.b shows the 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 distribution of linkers from the training set (n = 25,000). The distribution has a median reward of 0.52 (p75 = 0.58, p25 = 0.43). Crucially, the distribution is not skewed to either extreme confirming that the rewards are not saturated; instead, the rewards span a healthy range of (0.2, 0.8). The absence of sharp cutoffs or collapsed modes indicates that the reward landscape is well-conditioned and preserves meaningful variance across chemically diverse linkers. The function should ensure that structural modifications produced graded changes in the reward – consistent with flow-based optimization.              

> Supplementary Figure F.1 a .Distribution of the mass-normalized span for molecules from the training set (n = 25,000). Median = 0.02 Å mol g −1; p75 = 0.03 Å mol g −1and p25 = 0.01 Å mol g −1. The increasing sigmoidal desirability function is centred around p75, with a width of 0.5 ×(p75 – p25) to favour linkers with favourable mass-normalized spans. b. Distribution of the gravimetric reward score ( 𝑅 𝑔𝑟 𝑎𝑣 ) for molecules from the training set (n = 25,000). Median = 0.52; p75 = 0.58 and p25 = 0.43. Notably, the distribution is not skewed towards either extreme bound – which would have been indicative of collapse. The distribution spans almost the entire range and we also observe a smooth gradient towards higher scores, suggesting that a non-trivial fraction of the training linkers achieve high scores [ 𝛼 1=𝛼 2=0.4; 𝛼 3=0.2].

Supplementary Figure F.2 shows the 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 scores computed for linkers corresponding to some of the top-performing MOFs for gravimetric CH 4 storage. The scores assigned to each linker roughly correspond to the observed CH 4 storage trends. Notably, the linker of CU-6 – a MOF 26 recently reported by some of us (Chen et al., 2025b) – which has the highest gravimetric CH 4 storage capacity to date shows the highest relative 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 score. We however stress that there are several aspects relating to metal-node effects, topology and volumetric packing that are not captured here; this remains a computationally-efficient proxy for discriminating linkers.    

> Supplementary Figure F.2. 𝑅 𝑔𝑟 𝑎𝑣 scores for linkers belong to top-performing MOFs for gravimetric CH 4storage. The ranking of benchmark linkers is broadly consistent with reported trends. However, for a complete assessment, it is crucial to account for metal-node effects, topology and volumetric packing. As an illustrative example, while MOF-519 and MOF-520 share the same linker, they differ in coordination environments that in-turn have a significant impact on storage capacities.

Moving to volumetric storage, the goal is to balance porosity with the framework density. Excessively long, lightweight linkers which favor gravimetric storage, will lower the volumetric capacity due to reduced packing density. Accordingly, a balanced reward function needs to account for: (i) anchor – anchor span; (ii) rigidity; (iii) symmetry of the linker (or a proxy-thereof); and (iv) intermediate molecular weights that avoid excessively heavy (reduces gravimetric capacity) and light (reduces volumetric capacity) linkers. The balanced gas storage reward ( 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 ) is defined as follows: 

𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 = 𝛽 1 𝐷 (𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 −𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 ) + 𝛽 2 𝐷 (𝑑 𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) + 𝛽 3 𝐷 (𝑑 𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟 𝑦 ) + 𝛽 4 𝐷 (𝑑 𝑀𝑊 ) (F.4) where 𝑑 𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟 𝑦 is a measure of similarity of the chemical environment around each anchor using Morgan fingerprints (a proxy for linker symmetry) and 𝑑 𝑀𝑊 is the molecular weight of the linker passed through a Gaussian desirability function that penalizes extremely heavy and lightweight linkers while rewarding linkers with intermediate molecular weights ( Supplementary Figure F.3.a ). Each component is bounded between [0.05,0.95] and the parameters 𝛽 1 − 𝛽 4 are tunable. 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 

is similarly bounded between [0.05,0.95], with higher values suggesting an increased applicability for gas storage. We note here that several parameters (especially the Gaussian desirability function) may need to be tuned to the system of interest. The parameters 𝛽 1−𝛽 4 were empirically optimized against known linkers belonging to high-performing MOFs, with weights selected to preserve qualitative ranking of linkers corresponding to benchmark MOFs. At values of 𝛽 1 = 0.2; 𝛽 2 = 0.2; 𝛽 3 = 0.4 and 𝛽 4 = 0.2, the reward score trends were found to reasonably correlate to experimental data. Supplementary Figure F.3.c shows the distribution of 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 values using these parameters when evaluated on 25,000 molecules from the training dataset. The distribution is broad (with a median at 0.43) and similar to the 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 distribution, does not saturate at either extreme. There is a weak bimodal character, with a secondary shoulder at higher values, suggesting a partitioning of the linker space into two regimes. The larger class is geometrically sub-optimal ( Supplementary Figure F.3.b ), while the smaller class is primarily 27 driven by symmetry and rigidity components of the score. This is by design, considering that reticular assembly of frameworks of interest favor linkers with symmetric anchor environments and lower conformational flexibility yet having a reasonable span. 

Supplementary Figure F.3 a . Distribution of the molecular weight of molecules from the training dataset (n = 50,000). The distribution follows an expected trend with a mode around 250 g mol −1, median of 312 g mol −1 and a long tail that extends past 1250 g mol −1. Ideal linkers for gas storage should adopt intermediate molecular weights – i.e., not too light to favor low framework densities yet not too heavy to favor high densities. We thus define a Gaussian desirability function (centered around 320 g mol −1)with a width of 140 g mol −1 that rewards these intermediate values while penalizing extremes. b. Distribution of the 𝑑 𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟 𝑦 (n = 50,000) and c. 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 scores (n = 25,000) of molecules from the training dataset. 𝑑 𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟 𝑦 has a strong bimodal distribution suggesting the partitioning of the linker space into two classes: linkers with sub-optimal symmetry and linkers with optimal symmetry. Only 1.6% of the linkers attain the maximum 𝑑 𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟 𝑦 . For 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 , the distribution is broad (median = 0.43) with a weak bimodal character. Neither extreme is saturated – confirming that there is no collapse. The weak bimodal character stems from the partitioning of the linker space described above. Here, the smaller class indicates more favorable symmetry and rigidity yet having a reasonable span and molecular weight. 

Supplementary Figure F.4 shows the 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 scores computed for linkers corresponding to some of the top-performing MOFs for gravimetric CH 4 storage. Again, the scores assigned to each linker correlate well with the observed trends. In this instance, the linker of Al-soc-MOF-1 (Alezi et al., 2015) shows a higher relative 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 score compared to the linker of CU-6. The linker in PCN-14 shows the highest relative score; while the MOF itself is not the best performing, its performance is competitive nonetheless. Yet again, we stress that there are several aspects not captured here; we remind the reader that this remains a computationally-efficient proxy for discriminating linkers. 

Supplementary Figure F.4 . 𝑅 𝑔𝑎𝑠 scores for linkers belong to top-performing MOFs for CH 4 storage. There is a reasonable correlation between the score assigned to the linker and the reported gravimetric and volumetric storage capacities of the MOF. However, for a complete assessment, it is crucial to account for metal-node effects, topology and volumetric packing. 

28 F.2. Biocompatibility. For passive drug delivery applications, the goal is not only to identify synthetically plausible linkers, but to prioritize chemotypes that remain safe, soluble, and functionally effective after framework assembly. Consistent with the gas-storage analysis above, we preserve the geometric approach of linker-level screening while introducing safety, performance and compatibility controls that are directly relevant to biomedical deployment. The rationale of this reward function is again, modularity, focusing on: (i) safety terms penalizing metals and linker chemistries or fragments associated with high acute-toxicity risk; (ii) performance emphasising linker span, solubility and accessible porosity properties for loading space, which include pore-limiting diameter (PLD) and accessible surface area (ASA) or derived approximations if unavailable; (iii) benign-linker terms suppressing strongly interacting or reactive motifs that can perturb therapeutic cargo; (iv) stability prioritising candidates less likely to trigger burst release, premature linker failure, or charge-driven instability under physiological conditions; finally (v) penalty element penalising linkers with known toxicity warnings and extreme charge states. We define a biocompatibility objective as follows: 

𝑅 𝑏𝑖𝑜 = 𝛾 1𝑆 + 𝛾 2𝑃 + 𝛾 3 𝐵 + 𝛾 4𝑇 − 𝑃 (F.5) where 𝑆 , 𝑃 , 𝐵 , and 𝑇 denote safety, performance, benign-linker behaviour, and stability sub-scores, respectively, and 𝑃 is an explicit penalty for warnings and extreme charge states. All scores and components range between [0, 1].The safety block (S) combines: (i) metal-node safety from curated LD50-based priors reported by Menon and Fairen-Jimenez (2025), (ii) toxicity-space proximity derived from acute-toxicity chemistry, and (iii) formal-charge safety, 

𝑆 = 𝑠 1.𝑀 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑙 −𝑡𝑜𝑥𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 + 𝑠 2.𝑇 𝑡𝑜𝑥 −𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒 + 𝑠 3.𝑄 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒 (F.6) The toxicity-space term was built from descriptor and fingerprint neighbourhoods obtained from median lethal dose (LD50) readouts for 35,300 compounds in TOXRIC Database (Wu et al., 2023). 55-feature standardized numeric manifold (RDKit descriptors) and ECFP4 fingerprint manifold (2048 bits) were blended by learned block weights: numeric 0.62, fingerprint 0.38. Toxicity severity was weighted across United Nations Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (UN GHS) classes (Class 1 as the most severe to Class 5 associated with least toxic compounds) so that proximity (k-NN) to highly toxic regions is penalized more strongly. Toxicity-space was validated using several MOF linkers and other chemicals that were reported to have been experimentally tested, including PCN-222 (Tetrakis (4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin (TCPP) linker), UiO-66 (terephthalic acid linker), NU-1000 (Pyrene tetrabenzoic acid) and ZIF-8 (2-imidazoline, featuring known LD50 oral rat toxicity at ∼ 1,400 mg kg −1). The performance block (P) combines linker length, solubility, and surface/loading proxies, 

𝑃 = 𝑝 1 (𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 −𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 ) + 𝑝 2 (𝑑 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) + 𝑝 3 (𝑑 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 ) (F.7) where linker length 𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 −𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 is estimated from anchor-to-anchor separation and heavy-atom span; 𝑑 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 is encoded using LogS together with a bounded LogP window; 𝑑 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 is a surface/loading proxy which uses accessible surface area (ASA) and pore limiting diameter (PLD) when available, with deterministic linker-level proxies otherwise. Pore accessibility and packing constraints remain fundamental for biocompatibility applications as well. 29 The benign-linker block (B) combines formal-charge moderation, a payload-interaction window (LogP and TPSA), and structural alert burden (PAINS/BRENK/NIH), 

𝐵 = 𝑏 1 (𝑑 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒 ) + 𝑏 2 (𝑑 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ) + 𝑏 3 (𝑑 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 ) (F.8) This function is designed to penalise reactive linker environments that lead to irreversible payload-framework interactions. We also note that charge contributes to both safety and benign terms by design: safety captures acute electrostatic risk while benign score captures the payload interaction fit. Structural burden ( 𝑑 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 ) is estimated by calculating normalised count of reported warning matches for the fragments of the generated structure in either (i) PAINS (pan-assay interference); (ii) BRENK (reactive, toxic, or unstable fragments) or (iii) NIH (problematic functional groups based on NIH medicinal chemistry guidelines). The stability block (T) integrates metal stability, linker rigidity/symmetry, solubility-mediated dispersion behavior, and charge-release stability, 

𝑇 = 𝑡 1 (𝑑 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑙 −𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) + 𝑡 2 (𝑑 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑟 −𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) + 𝑡 3 (𝑑 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) + 𝑡 4 (𝑑 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 ) (F.8) Solubility is recognised as important predictor of desirable bioavailability characteristics. Metal stability and safety are obtained from the curated dataset in Menon and Fairen-Jimenez (2025), while the stability of the linker is determined based on rigidity and symmetry similar to the reward function for gas storage in Supplementary Section F.1 above. During method development, Bayesian optimisation was used to tune component and subcomponent weights under constrained known validation linker samples. The design objective combined toxicity-aware ranking constraints (to suppress high scores in severe toxicity classes), smooth score spread across viable chemotypes, and robustness across repeated sampled subsets. Final production weights were selected from the stable region identified across these runs and then fixed to preserve deterministic scoring as 𝛾 1 = 0.60 , 𝛾 2 = 0.14 , 𝛾 3 = 0.07 and 𝛾 4 = 0.19 . Safety here is a rigid constraint and was assigned the highest weightage. Our calculated safety score qualitatively aligns well with expected trends (for instance, terephthalic acid > ethylene glycol >

TCPP > 2-methylimidazole > Pyrene tetrabenzoic acid > fentanyl). Supplementary Figure F.5 

shows the distributions of the individual blocks and the distribution of the corresponding composite 

𝑅 𝑏𝑖𝑜 . All distributions remain broad and non-saturated, indicating that the function retains ranking resolution rather than collapsing near hard bounds. 

## Supplementary Section G. Design modes 

Nexerra 𝑅 1 supports two distinct design modes for linker generation: (i) Direct design and (ii) Scaffold-constrained design. These design modes differ in how the latent variables are sampled and how geometric constraints are imposed. In practice, the direct design mode works best for 2-connected linkers and on nets with less strict topological constraints – for instance, fcu and pcu 

nets. On the other hand, the scaffold-constrained design mode works better for highly-connected linkers and nets with stricter topological constraints – such as csq .

G.1. Direct design. Here Nexerra 𝑅 1 generates linkers by sampling the local neighborhood around a user-specified seed molecule. Given a seed linker 𝑥 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 , the encoder approximates a posterior distribution, 

𝑞 𝜙 (𝑧 |𝑥 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 ) = N ( 𝑧 ; 𝜇 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 , 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔 (𝜎 2 

> 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑

)) (G.1) 30 Supplementary Figure F.5. a. Distribution of the 𝑅 𝑏𝑖𝑜 scores of linkers from the training set (n = 25,000) of which 93.76% produced valid scores after invalid SMILES cleaning/parsing. The total score distribution remains broad (with median = 0.469), indicating non-collapsed ranking capacity for molecular optimization. b - e. Distributions of individual components scores for b. safety (S); c. 

performance (P); d. benign-linker score (B) and e. stability (T). Each of these distributions is also non-collapsed to either extreme. We further impose rigid constraints during the design process, such as rejecting molecules with safety scores < 0.50 .

where 𝜇 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 = 𝜇 𝜙 (𝑥 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 ) and 𝜎 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 = 𝜎 𝜙 (𝑥 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 ). To control the radius of the neighborhood, we sample embeddings from a scaled neighborhood of the posterior, i.e, 

𝑧 = 𝜇 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 + 𝛼𝜎 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 · 𝜖, 𝜖 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼 ) (G.2) where 𝛼 > 0 is a defined neighborhood radius. The smaller the 𝛼 , the more conservative the exploration while larger 𝛼 values lead to more diverse molecules with respect to the seed. Each latent embedding is sampled using autoregressive decoding, 

𝑥 ∼ 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 |𝑧 ) (G.3) 31 using temperature-scaling and nucleus sampling as described in Supplementary Information Section B.4 . Generated molecules are then filtered first using strict chemical filters, followed by application-specific reward functions (see Supplementary Information Section F ). The direct design mode thus enables rapid exploration of the local chemical neighborhood of seeds without imposing any scaffold-constraints. 

Supplementary Figure G.1 shows the direct design method applied to several different classes of bidentate MOF linkers. These linkers post-generation are subjected to strict chemical filters to discard structures which are entirely implausible or highly synthetically complex. Here we show a subset of generated linkers with 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 scores > 0.7 × 𝑅 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣 values of the seed. 

> Supplementary Figure G.1 . Direct design mode applied to different classes of bidentate MOF linkers. The seeds are highlighted in yellow.

G.2. Scaffold-constrained design. Here the design is constrained around a pre-defined molecular core (or scaffold) that contains defined connecting handles (again denoted with the ‘[Lr]’ token for ease of processing). The goal of this mode is to preserve this scaffold – which is otherwise not possible in the direct design mode. Given a seed linker 𝑥 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 , we first decompose the linker as, 

𝑥 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 = (𝑥 𝑠𝑐𝑎 𝑓 𝑓 , 𝑥 𝑎𝑟𝑚 ) (G.4) The design method is agnostic to the number of arms, however, this number is preserved during the design process. In other words, this design mode does not change the connectivity of the input seed. After this decomposition, we apply the direct design method to 𝑥 𝑎𝑟𝑚 (see 𝐺. 1 - 𝐺. 3). Once new arms are generated, they are symmetrically grafted onto the core. First, we identify the anchor sites on the scaffold, denoted by the ‘[Lr]’ token. Here, the connection site is the atom directly bonded to ‘[Lr]’. Once these atoms are identified, the ‘[Lr]’ atoms are deleted from 32 the scaffold. From the arm (which is ditopic), we delete one ‘[Lr]’ atom, while preserving the other one to indicate node-coordination moieties. We then attach this processed arm by forming a single bond between the scaffold connection site and the arm connection site. We then repeat this process for every connection site on the core. Finally, we perform a force-field optimization of the linker and carry out sanitization. As an illustrative example, Supplementary Information Figure G.2 

shows this design mode applied to the porphyrin-core. 

> Supplementary Figure G.2 . Scaffold-constrained design mode applied to the porphyrin-core.

## Supplementary Section H. Experimental section 

H.1. Synthetic procedure Synthesis of Linker (L). The synthesis of L ( Supplementary Figure H.1 ) follows a previously reported procedure (Matsunaga et al., 2011). 

Synthesis of CU-525. HfCl 4 (100 mg), H 4L (50 mg) and benzoic acid (1.25 g, 7.49 mmol) were dissolved in a mixture of DMA (25 mL) and HOAc (5 mL) through sonication. The resulting solution was sealed and heated in a 120 0C oven for 48 h. Black cubic crystals were formed. 

H.2. Single Crystal X-ray Crystallography. Single crystal X-ray diffraction experiments were performed on the PROXIMA 2A micro-focused beamline at Synchrotron SOLEIL ( 𝜆 = 0.729319 Å) using an EIGER X 9M 2D hybrid photon counting detector. X-ray data were collected at 100 K. Data integration and reduction were undertaken with Xia2 (Winter, 2010). No corrections for solvent scattering have been made. The structure was initially solved with SHELXT (Sheldrick, 2015b) 33 Supplementary Figure H.1 . The porphyrin linker designed using Nexerra 𝑅 1 (left) and the linker ( L) used for the synthesis of CU-525 

and refined by full-matrix least squares refinement on F 2 by the SHELXTL-2014 (Sheldrick, 2015a) using the Olex2-1.5 (Dolomanov et al., 2009) software package. Standard crystallographic methods were used where necessary, including constraints, restraints, and rigid bodies. All carbon-bound hydrogen atoms were added in idealized positions and refined using a riding model. Restraints were used to obtain reasonable parameters. H-atoms were refined isotropically, while the other atoms were refined anisotropically. Crystal data and details of the X-ray data collection are given in 

Supplementary Table H.1 .

H.3. Comparison of structural models. Supplementary Figure H.2 compares the structural model obtained from the topological assembly of the Nexerra 𝑅 1-generated linker ( Φ- 11) with the experimentally resolved single-crystal structure of CU-525. The model structure is assembled using the Zr 6-oxo cluster (consistent with MOF-525), while CU-525 is synthesized experimentally using an Hf 6-oxo cluster. Due to nearly identical coordination geometry, this substitution is not expected to alter the underlying net. At a global topology and connectivity level, Φ-11 reproduces the coordination environment and node connectivity of CU-525; however, local differences are observed in some linker arms. These arise because the assembly algorithm selects an alternate but symmetry-equivalent orientation – essentially ‘flipping’ the placement of the arm. This occurs because the arm placement is geometrically invariant and the algorithm is unable to discriminate between the alternate placement conditions. Resolving this would require substantial refinement of the assembly algorithm itself and lies outside the scope of the present work. Simulated powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns of Φ-11 and CU-525 are also shown in Supplementary Figure H.2 . Both patterns are in close agreement with each other, with no additional peaks observed in the generated structure. We, however, observe a slight systematic shift in the peak positions of the generated structure relative to CU-525 which arise as an effect of structural relaxation. There are differences in relative peak positions as well, which are attributed to variations in either atomic positions or linker conformations. Overall, these observations suggest structural equivalence with minor conformational deviations. 34 CU-525 (CCDC: 2514566) 

Formula C38 .67 H54 .67 HfN 7.33 O5.33 Zn 0.5

F.W. (g mol −1) 918.73 

Temperature/K 100 

Wavelength/Å Synchrotron ( 𝜆 = 0.729319 )

Crystal system Cubic 

Space group Pm-3m 

𝑎 = 𝑏 = 𝑐 / Å 22.7093(2) 

𝛼 = 𝛽 = 𝛾 / ◦ 90 

Volume / Å 3, 𝑍 11711.5(3), 6 

𝜌 𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑐𝑔 /cm 3 0.782 

𝜇 /mm −1 1.608 

F(000) 2806.0 

2𝜃 range for data collection / ◦ 2.602 to 54.206 

Reflections collected 117300 

Independent reflections 2228 [ 𝑅 int = 0.1933 , 𝑅 𝜎 = 0.0858 ]

Data/restraints/parameters 2228/110/68 

Goof 0.894 

Final 𝑅 indexes [ 𝐼 ≥ 2𝜎 (𝐼 )] 𝑅 1 = 0.0928 , 𝑤𝑅 2 = 0.2712 

Final 𝑅 indexes [all data] 𝑅 1 = 0.1193 , 𝑤𝑅 2 = 0.2811 

Largest diff. peak/hole / e Å −3 2.60/-2.48 

> Supplementary Table H.1 . Crystal data and structure refinement for CU-525

## Supplementary Section I. Flow model 

I.1. Flow matching formulation. We use the flow-matching formulation introduced by Lipman et al. (2022) and extended by Tong et al. (2023). Below, we provide only the essential mathematical definitions and refer readers to the original and foundational references for full derivations. Starting with the latent space learnt by Nexerra 𝑅 1, let: 

(𝑧 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 )𝑁  

> (𝑖 =1)

, 𝑧 𝑖 ∈ R𝐷 , 𝑦 𝑖 ∈ R (I.1) denote the latent encodings 𝑧 𝑖 of the training dataset and 𝑦 𝑖 the associated scalar property (e.g. anchor – anchor span, logP, or, in principle, any reward function). The latent variables are then standardised as: 

𝜇 𝑧 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑧 𝑖 , 𝜎 𝑧 =

vut 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

(𝑧 𝑖 − 𝜇 𝑧 ) ⊙ ( 𝑧 𝑖 − 𝜇 𝑧 ) + 𝜖 

!

(I.2) and we define: 35 Supplementary Figure H.2 . (Top) Optimized structural model of Φ-11 (left) compared to the structure of CU-525 resolved using SCXRD as described above. We note that the MOF assembly algorithm flips the placement of the arm in certain instances leading to conformation deviations from the experimentally resolved structure. (Bottom) Simulated PXRD patterns of Φ-11 (red) and CU-525 (blue). Please note that the patterns have been max-normalized. 

˜𝑧 𝑖 = (𝑧 𝑖 − 𝜇 𝑧 )

𝜎 𝑧 

(I.3) The flow model and associated losses are defined in this standardised latent space. This is then inverted during inference. For training, we replace the standard Gaussian prior with an empirical latent prior defined over a finite set of encoder embeddings. Initial latent states are sampled uniformly from a percentile-filtered subset of this latent bank. We define a percentile-based threshold ( 𝜏 𝑠 ) on 

{𝑦 𝑖 } such that for sorted property values 𝑦 1 ≥ 𝑦 2 ≥ ... ≥ 𝑦 𝑁 , we have a linear percentile scheduler: 

𝑃 𝑠 = 𝑃 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 + ( 𝑃 𝑒𝑛𝑑 − 𝑃 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 ) × 𝑛 𝑆 (I.4) where 𝑛 is the current training step, and 𝑆 is the total number of training steps. For maximising a property (e.g. length) 𝑃 𝑒𝑛𝑑 > 𝑃 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 while for minimizing a property (e.g. logP) 𝑃 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 > 𝑃 𝑒𝑛𝑑 . Given 

𝑃 𝑛 ∈ [ 0, 100 ], we select an index 𝑘 𝑛 = [𝑁 (100 −𝑃 𝑛 ) 

> 100

] and define the current threshold as: 

𝜏 𝑠 = 𝑌 𝑘 𝑛 (I.5) The conditional target distribution at step 𝑛 is the empirical distribution over latents whose property exceeds the threshold ( 𝜏 𝑛 ): 

𝑞 𝜏 𝑠 (𝑧 ) ∝ 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

{𝑦 𝑖 ≥ 𝜏 𝑛 }𝛿 (𝑧 − ˜𝑧 𝑖 ) (I.6) 36 For a contrastive unconditional sampling (used for classifier-free guidance, discussed shortly) we define a larger subset of the latent distribution (OR the full distribution) as: 

𝑞 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 (𝑧 ) ∝ 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝛿 (𝑧 − ˜𝑧 𝑖 ) (I.7) We parameterize a continuous normalizing flow (CNF) in the latent space by an ordinary differential equation (ODE): 

𝑑 (𝑧 )

𝑑𝑡 = 𝑓 𝜃 (𝑡, 𝑧 (𝑡 ), 𝑐 ), 𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1], 𝑧 (0) ∼ 𝑝 0 (I.8) where 𝑧 (𝑡 ) ∈ R𝐷 is the latent state at time 𝑡 , 𝑐 ∈ R is the scalar conditioning variable and 

𝑓 𝜃 : [0, 1] × R𝐷 × R → R𝐷 is the neural net vector field. We implement this vector field as a neural network 𝑁 𝑁 (defined in Supplementary Information Section I.2 ) operating on the concatenation of the latent ( 𝑧 ), time embedding ( 𝑡 ) and condition ( 𝑐 ): 

𝑓 𝜃 (𝑧, 𝑡, 𝑐 ) = 𝑁 𝑁 ([ 𝑧, 𝛾 (𝑡 ), 𝑐 ]) (I.9) where 𝛾 (𝑡 ) ∈ R2𝑑 𝐹𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑟 is a Fourier feature embedding of time – 𝛾 (𝑡 ) = (𝑠𝑖𝑛 (2𝜋𝐵𝑡 ), 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (2𝜋𝐵𝑡 )) –similar to the positional encoding performed on the training data before passing it to the transformer encoder. 𝐵 ∈ R𝑑 𝐹𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑟 is a random frequency vector ( 𝑑 = 64 ). For a fixed condition 𝑐 , integrating this ODE from 𝑡 = 0 → 𝑡 = 1 defines a flow map: 

Φ𝑐 𝜃 : R𝐷 → R𝐷 , 𝑧 1 = Φ 𝑐 𝜃 (𝑧 0) (I.10) This flow map approximates the optimal transport between the empirical prior ( 𝑝 0) towards the conditional empirical distribution 𝑞 𝜏 (𝑧 ).We train 𝑓 𝜃 using the exact optimal transport-conditional flow matching (OT-CFM) between the empirical prior and the conditional (OR unconditional) empirical latent distribution (Tong et al., 2023). For a training sample ( 𝑠 ), we sample the base latents: 𝑧 0 ∼ 𝑝 0, conditional target: 𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑  

> 1

∼ 𝑞 𝜏 𝑠 

and unconditional target: 𝑧 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑  

> 1

∼ 𝑞 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 . These are paired with corresponding conditions: 

𝑐 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 = 𝜏 𝑠 , 𝑐 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 = 𝑐 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 ← (in our case ∅ = 0.0). In order to train both conditional and unconditional flows in a single network, we apply conditional dropout with probability 𝑝 𝑑𝑟𝑜 𝑝 . For each sample in the mini-batch, we choose: 

𝑃 



(𝑧 1, 𝑐 ) = (𝑧 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑  

> 1

, 𝑐 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 )



= 𝑝 𝑑𝑟𝑜 𝑝 , (I.11.1) 

𝑃 



(𝑧 1, 𝑐 ) = (𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑  

> 1

, 𝑐 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 )



= 1 − 𝑝 𝑑𝑟𝑜 𝑝 (I.11.2) For each pair (𝑧 0, 𝑧 1), we define the displacement interpolation (the OT geodesic in Euclidean space): 

𝑥 𝑡 = (1 − 𝑡 )𝑧 0 + 𝑡𝑧 1, 𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1] (I.12) Under the quadratic cost OT formulation, the exact conditional OT flow along this path has a constant velocity: 37 𝑣 ∗ (𝑧 0, 𝑧 1) = 𝑧 1 − 𝑧 0 ← 𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡 (I.13) OT-CFM leverages this formulation to construct a simple closed-form target vector field. The training objective minimizes the discrepancy between the model vector field and this OT-flow at random intermediate times: 

L𝑂𝑇 −𝐶𝐹 𝑀 (𝜃 ) = E𝑧 0∼𝑝 0,(𝑧 1,𝑐 )∼ 𝑞 𝑠 ,𝑡 ∼U ( 0,1) || 𝑓 𝜃 (𝑡, 𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑐 ) − ( 𝑧 1 − 𝑧 0)|| 22 (I.14) where 𝑞 𝑠 is a mixture over conditional and unconditional latent samples. The training is performed in mini-batches and 𝑡 is sampled i.i.d from U ( 0, 1) per example. During sampling, we use classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho and Salimans, 2022) to bias the flow model towards high-threshold conditions without having to train a separate classifier. Given a desired threshold 𝑐 ∗ = 𝜏 ∗ and a CFG scale – 𝑚 ≥ 0, we define conditional and unconditional vector fields at a point ( 𝑡, 𝑧 ) as: 

𝑣 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 (𝑡, 𝑧 ) = 𝑓 𝜃 (𝑡, 𝑧, 𝑐 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 ), 𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 (𝑡, 𝑧 ; 𝑐 ∗) = 𝑓 𝜃 (𝑡, 𝑧, 𝑐 ∗) (I.15) The guided vector field is then: 

𝑣 𝐶𝐹𝐺 (𝑡, 𝑧 ; 𝑐 ∗, 𝑚 ) = 𝑣 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 (𝑡, 𝑧 ) + 𝑚 (𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 (𝑡, 𝑧 ; 𝑐 ∗) − 𝑣 𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 (𝑡, 𝑧 )) (I.16) We generate samples by solving the guided ODE: 

𝑑𝑧 (𝑡 )

𝑑𝑡 = 𝑣 𝐶𝐹𝐺 (𝑡, 𝑧 (𝑡 ); 𝑐 ∗, 𝑠 ), 𝑧 (0) ∼ 𝑝 0 (I.17) from 𝑡 = 0 → 𝑡 = 1. The ODE is integrated with an adaptive Dormand-Prince solver. For 𝑚 = 0,this is reduced to an unconditioned model and for 𝑚 = 1, this is the plain conditional model. 𝑚 > 1

amplifies condition-dependent output. 

I.2. Neural network architecture. The core network is a stack of N residual blocks (ResBlocks) (He et al., 2016). For our implementation, we use 𝑁 = 8. Each block uses FiLM conditioning (Perez et al., 2018). Given a block input 𝑥 ∈ R𝐻 , we first apply a LayerNorm ( 𝐿𝑁 ): 

˜𝑥 = 𝐿𝑁 (𝑥 ) (I.18) A FiLM module produces per-feature scale and shift parameters (𝛾, 𝛽 ) ∈ R𝐻 from the conditioning vector: 

(𝛾, 𝛽 ) = 𝐹𝑖𝐿𝑀 (ℎ𝑐 ), 𝐹𝑖𝐿𝑀 : R𝐻 → R2𝐻 (I.19) where ℎ𝑐 is a hidden conditioning vector. The normalized activations are then modulated per-feature as, 

ˆ𝑥 = ˜𝑥 ⊙ ( 1 + 𝛾 ) + 𝛽 (I.20) These are then passed through a MLP with SiLU activations. The FiLM layer is intended to improve the stability of the deep residual stacks. Following this, we add 𝐿𝑁 and linear projection back to 38 Supplementary Figure I.1. (Left to right). rRMSE of predicted and target latent displacement; mean-cosine similarity between the predicted and target latent displacements; median anchor – anchor span for n = 5000 sampled molecules from the model checkpoint. Please note: during training the target is monotonically increased from the 70 𝑡 ℎ percentile to the 95 𝑡 ℎ percentile – i.e., the training gets progressively harder as the steps increase, which reflects in the growing rRMSE and dropping cosine. 

the latent dimension. 

I.3. Training and evaluation. Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow was trained over 200,000 steps with evaluation every 20,000 steps. At each evaluation, 5000 samples were generated and shift in the property distribution and transport fidelity was logged. Supplementary Figure I.1 shows the corresponding training logs. The transport accuracy was quantified via relative RMSE (or rRMSE) and mean cosine similarity between predicted and reference latent displacements. Across the training steps, rRMSE increased moderately from ∼ 0.02 to ∼ 0.035 ( ∼ 0.030 at final checkpoint), while cosine similarity decreased gradually from ∼ 0.97 to ∼ 0.92 – 0.94. These trends are reflective of progressively stricter percentile scheduler – i.e., the target slice moving toward higher percentiles. As the target to meet gets stricter, the required displacement increases in magnitude. Importantly, cosine similarity remained high ( > 0.92) throughout training, indicating strong directional alignment of the learned vector field with the reference OT displacement. Sampled molecules exhibited a systematic upward shift in the target property distribution (here the anchor – anchor span) over training. The median span increased, while the interquartile range remained stable across checkpoints. This indicates redistribution of probability mass toward higher-percentile regimes without collapse. Notably, at step 180,000 we recorded the highest relatively median anchor-anchor length of 9.05 Å. We thus, selected this checkpoint for further production. Overall, training dynamics are stable and consistent with successful optimal-transport-based conditional generation. 

I.4. Flow generated linkers and structures. We shift our focus to linkers and their corresponding structures generated using the trained flow model. Each optimized structure has been appended to the data supporting this manuscript. Starting with the BDC linker as a seed, Supplementary Figure I.2 shows sample linkers generated by Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow subject to strict geometric filters to ensure compatibility with the target fcu net. The main filter implemented here was restricting selection to those linkers whose anchor – anchor angle > 160 0 – i.e., a linearity constraint. 

Supplementary Figure I.3 shows optimized structures generated using these linkers on an fcu net using a Zr 6-oxo cluster. While in most cases structural assembly was successful, we observed instances where assembly fails – most commonly, due to overlapping atoms, or additionally 39 Supplementary Figure I.2. A subset of linkers generated by Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow using a BDC seed (yellow). These linkers were selected post-filtering for geometric compatibility with the fcu net. The linker highlighted in pink is a rediscovery of the input seed. 

coordinating moieties close to the placed handles. Success rates however depend on topological and geometric complexity of the target net. 

## Supplementary Section J. Computational details 

Gravimetric and volumetric methane uptake capacities were obtained from grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) simulations, in which chemical potential, volume, and temperature were held constant. Simulations were performed with the RASPA code (Dubbeldam et al., 2016), treating both framework and adsorbate molecules as rigid. During each Monte Carlo cycle, adsorbates were allowed to undergo translation, insertion, and swap moves – each with equal probability. Each simulation comprised 30,000 cycles; the first 15,000 cycles were treated as equilibration, following which ensemble averages were collected over 15,000 production cycles. The number of trial moves per cycle was either the current number of adsorbates in the system or 20, whichever is the largest. Adsorbate-framework and adsorbate-adsorbate interactions were described using Lennard-Jones (LJ) potentials combined with electrostatic interactions. LJ interactions were truncated and shifted to zero at 12.5 Å, and Ewald summation was applied for long-range electrostatics. LJ parameters for CH 4 were adopted from (Martin et al., 2001). Framework LJ parameters were chosen from the Dreiding force field (Mayo et al., 1990), where available, and with UFF parameters otherwise (Rappé et al., 1992). No framework partial charges were assigned since the CH 4 model adopted does not include partial charges. For interactions lacking explicit parametrization, cross-interactions were 40 Supplementary Figure I.3. A subset of optimized structures assembled on the fcu net from linkers generated from Nexerra 𝑅 1-Flow. 

determined using Lorentz-Berthelot mixing rules. We append a set of sample GCMC scripts in the data that supports this manuscript for readers who wish to reproduce these calculations. 41 References 

Dalal Alezi, Youssef Belmabkhout, Mikhail Suyetin, Prashant M Bhatt, Łukasz J Weseliński, Vera Solovyeva, Karim Adil, Ioannis Spanopoulos, Pantelis N Trikalitis, Abdul-Hamid Emwas, et al. MOF crystal chemistry paving the way to gas storage needs: aluminum-based soc-MOF for CH 4,O2, and CO 2 storage. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 137(41):13308–13318, 2015. Mehrdad Asgari, Pablo Albacete, Dhruv Menon, Yuexi Lyu, Xu Chen, and David Fairen-Jimenez. The structuring of porous reticular materials for energy applications at industrial scales. Chemical Society Reviews , 54(10):4701–4744, 2025. Nathaniel R Bennett, Joseph L Watson, Robert J Ragotte, Andrew J Borst, DéJenaé L See, Connor Weidle, Riti Biswas, Yutong Yu, Ellen L Shrock, Russell Ault, et al. Atomically accurate de novo design of antibodies with RFdiffusion. Nature , 649(8095):183–193, 2026. Christopher P Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey, Nick Watters, Guillaume Desjardins, and Alexander Lerchner. Understanding disentangling in 𝛽 -VAE. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03599 ,2018. Swaroop Chakraborty, Dhruv Menon, Iuliia Mikulska, Christian Pfrang, David Fairen-Jimenez, Superb K Misra, and Iseult Lynch. Make metal–organic frameworks safe and sustainable by design for industrial translation. Nature Reviews Materials , 10(3):167–169, 2025. Xu Chen, Dhruv Menon, Xiaoliang Wang, Meng He, Mohammad Reza Alizadeh Kiapi, Mehrdad Asgari, Yuexi Lyu, Xianhui Tang, Luke L Keenan, William Shepard, et al. Flexibility-frustrated porosity for enhanced selective CO 2 adsorption in an ultramicroporous metal-organic framework. 

Chem , 11(7), 2025a. Xu Chen, Lik Hong Wee, Mohammad Reza Alizadeh Kiapi, Christos Tampaxis, Yan Zheng, Mehrdad Asgari, Dhruv Menon, Tom Willhammar, Luke Keenan, Georgia Charalambopoulou, et al. Topology-driven design of an ultraporous red MOF for high-performance hydrogen storage. 

ChemRxiv preprint chemrxiv-2025-f39b4 , 2025b. Zhijie Chen, Penghao Li, Ryther Anderson, Xingjie Wang, Xuan Zhang, Lee Robison, Louis R Redfern, Shinya Moribe, Timur Islamoglu, Diego A Gómez-Gualdrón, et al. Balancing volumetric and gravimetric uptake in highly porous materials for clean energy. Science , 368(6488):297–303, 2020. Conor Cleeton and Lev Sarkisov. Inverse design of metal-organic frameworks using deep dreaming approaches. Nature Communications , 16(1):4806, 2025. Connor W Coley, Luke Rogers, William H Green, and Klavs F Jensen. SCScore: synthetic complexity learned from a reaction corpus. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 58(2):252–261, 2018. Yamil J Colón, Diego A Gómez-Gualdrón, and Randall Q Snurr. Topologically guided, automated construction of metal–organic frameworks and their evaluation for energy-related applications. 

Crystal Growth & Design , 17(11):5801–5810, 2017. Oleg V Dolomanov, Luc J Bourhis, Richard J Gildea, Judith AK Howard, and Horst Puschmann. OLEX2: a complete structure solution, refinement and analysis program. Applied Crystallography ,42(2):339–341, 2009. David Dubbeldam, Sofía Calero, Donald E Ellis, and Randall Q Snurr. RASPA: molecular simulation software for adsorption and diffusion in flexible nanoporous materials. Molecular Simulation , 42 (2):81–101, 2016. Rokas Elijošius, Fabian Zills, Ilyes Batatia, Sam Walton Norwood, Dávid Péter Kovács, Christian Holm, and Gábor Csányi. Zero shot molecular generation via similarity kernels. Nature Communications , 16(1):5991, 2025. Nathan C Frey, Ryan Soklaski, Simon Axelrod, Siddharth Samsi, Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli, Connor W Coley, and Vijay Gadepally. Neural scaling of deep chemical models. Nature Machine Intelligence ,5(11):1297–1305, 2023. Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, 42 Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel, Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous representation of molecules. ACS Central Science , 4(2):268–276, 2018. Vincent Guillerm, Dongwook Kim, Jarrod F Eubank, Ryan Luebke, Xinfang Liu, Karim Adil, Myoung Soo Lah, and Mohamed Eddaoudi. A supermolecular building approach for the design and construction of metal–organic frameworks. Chemical Society Reviews , 43(16):6141–6172, 2014. Vincent Guillerm, Hao Jiang, Dalal Alezi, Norah Alsadun, and Mohamed Eddaoudi. From elementary to advanced design of functional metal–organic frameworks: a user guide to deciphering the reticular chemistry toolbox. Advanced Materials , 37(52):2414153, 2025. Mayank Gupta and Jagadese J Vittal. Control of interpenetration and structural transformations in the interpenetrated MOFs. Coordination Chemistry Reviews , 435:213789, 2021. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016. Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 ,2022. Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text degeneration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751 , 2019. Ilia Igashov, Hannes Stärk, Clément Vignac, Arne Schneuing, Victor Garcia Satorras, Pascal Frossard, Max Welling, Michael Bronstein, and Bruno Correia. Equivariant 3D-conditional diffusion model for molecular linker design. Nature Machine Intelligence , 6(4):417–427, 2024. Kevin Maik Jablonka, Daniele Ongari, Seyed Mohamad Moosavi, and Berend Smit. Big-data science in porous materials: materials genomics and machine learning. Chemical Reviews , 120(16):8066– 8129, 2020. Hao Jiang, Dalal Alezi, and Mohamed Eddaoudi. A reticular chemistry guide for the design of periodic solids. Nature Reviews Materials , 6(6):466–487, 2021. Hao Jiang, Salma Benzaria, Norah Alsadun, Jiangtao Jia, Justyna Czaban-Jóźwiak, Vincent Guillerm, Aleksander Shkurenko, Zeynabou Thiam, Mickaele Bonneau, Vijay K Maka, et al. Merged-nets enumeration for the systematic design of multicomponent reticular structures. Science , 386(6722): 659–666, 2024a. Wentao Jiang, Cong-Cong Liang, and Yue-Biao Zhang. Multivariate metal–organic frameworks for programming functions. Advanced Functional Materials , 34(43):2308946, 2024b. Joonyoung F Joung, Mun Hong Fong, Nicholas Casetti, Jordan P Liles, Ne S Dassanayake, and Connor W Coley. Electron flow matching for generative reaction mechanism prediction. Nature ,645(8079):115–123, 2025. Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. Mario Krenn, Florian Häse, AkshatKumar Nigam, Pascal Friederich, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik. Self-referencing embedded strings (SELFIES): A 100% robust molecular string representation. Machine Learning: Science and Technology , 1(4):045024, 2020. Mario Krenn, Qianxiang Ai, Senja Barthel, Nessa Carson, Angelo Frei, Nathan C Frey, Pascal Friederich, Théophile Gaudin, Alberto Alexander Gayle, Kevin Maik Jablonka, et al. SELFIES and the future of molecular string representations. Patterns , 3(10), 2022. Aarti Krishnan, Jacqueline A Valeri, Wengong Jin, Nina M Donghia, Leif Sieben, Andreas Luttens, Yu Zhang, Seyed Majed Modaresi, Andrew Hennes, Jenna Fromer, et al. A generative deep learning approach to de novo antibiotic design. Cell , 188(21):5962–5979, 2025. Greg Landrum et al. Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics software, 2016. Thanh-Hiep Thi Le, Mohammad Reza Alizadeh Kiapi, Dhruv Menon, David Fairen-Jimenez, and Manuel A Ortuño. Oxidative ring-opening of dimethylfuran in zeolitic imidazolate frameworks through computational design. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C , 2026. 43 Jin Sub Lee, Jisun Kim, and Philip M Kim. Score-based generative modeling for de novo protein design. Nature Computational Science , 3(5):382–392, 2023. Mian Li, Dan Li, Michael O’Keeffe, and Omar M Yaghi. Topological analysis of metal–organic frameworks with polytopic linkers and/or multiple building units and the minimal transitivity principle. Chemical reviews , 114(2):1343–1370, 2014. Jian-Bin Lin, Tai TT Nguyen, Ramanathan Vaidhyanathan, Jake Burner, Jared M Taylor, Hana Durekova, Farid Akhtar, Roger K Mah, Omid Ghaffari-Nik, Stefan Marx, et al. A scalable metal-organic framework as a durable physisorbent for carbon dioxide capture. Science , 374(6574): 1464–1469, 2021. Tianyang Lin, Yuxin Wang, Xiangyang Liu, and Xipeng Qiu. A survey of transformers. AI Open , 3: 111–132, 2022. Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 , 2022. Marcus G Martin, Aidan P Thompson, and Tina M Nenoff. Effect of pressure, membrane thickness, and placement of control volumes on the flux of methane through thin silicalite membranes: A dual control volume grand canonical molecular dynamics study. The Journal of Chemical Physics ,114(16):7174–7181, 2001. Satoshi Matsunaga, Nanako Endo, and Wasuke Mori. A new metal carboxylate framework based on porphyrin with extended 𝜋 -conjugation. European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry , 2011(29): 4550–4557, 2011. Stephen L Mayo, Barry D Olafson, and William A Goddard. DREIDING: a generic force field for molecular simulations. Journal of Physical chemistry , 94(26):8897–8909, 1990. Francesca Melle, Dhruv Menon, João Conniot, Jon Ostolaza-Paraiso, Sergio Mercado, Jhenifer Oliveira, Xu Chen, Bárbara B Mendes, João Conde, and David Fairen-Jimenez. Rational design of metal–organic frameworks for pancreatic cancer therapy: from machine learning screening to in vivo efficacy. Advanced Materials , 37(52):2412757, 2025. Dhruv Menon and David Fairen-Jimenez. Guiding the rational design of biocompatible metal-organic frameworks for drug delivery. Matter , 8(3), 2025. Peyman Z Moghadam, Yongchul G Chung, and Randall Q Snurr. Progress toward the computational discovery of new metal–organic framework adsorbents for energy applications. Nature Energy , 9 (2):121–133, 2024. Junkil Park, Youhan Lee, and Jihan Kim. Multi-modal conditional diffusion model using signed distance functions for metal-organic frameworks generation. Nature Communications , 16(1):34, 2025. Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018. Anthony K Rappé, Carla J Casewit, Kent S Colwell, William A Goddard III, and W Mason Skiff. UFF, a full periodic table force field for molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics simulations. 

Journal of the American Chemical Society , 114(25):10024–10035, 1992. Zichao Rong, Zihao Chen, Felix Luong, Saumil Chheda, HT Nhan Luong, Zhiling Zheng, Kevin Greco, Abdullah A Alghamdi, K Huyen Bui, Théo Jaffrelot Inizan, et al. Algorithmic iterative reticular synthesis of zeolitic imidazolate framework crystals. Nature Synthesis , pages 1–11, 2025. George M Sheldrick. Crystal structure refinement with SHELXL. Crystal Structure Communications ,71(1):3–8, 2015a. George M Sheldrick. SHELXT–Integrated space-group and crystal-structure determination. 

Foundations of Crystallography , 71(1):3–8, 2015b. Michael A Skinnider, R Greg Stacey, David S Wishart, and Leonard J Foster. Chemical language models enable navigation in sparsely populated chemical space. Nature Machine Intelligence , 3(9): 759–770, 2021. 44 Woochul Song, Zhiling Zheng, Ali H Alawadhi, and Omar M Yaghi. MOF water harvester produces water from Death Valley desert air in ambient sunlight. Nature Water , 1(7):626–634, 2023. Alexander Tong, Kilian Fatras, Nikolay Malkin, Guillaume Huguet, Yanlei Zhang, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models with minibatch optimal transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00482 , 2023. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 30, 2017. Graeme Winter. xia2: an expert system for macromolecular crystallography data reduction. Applied Crystallography , 43(1):186–190, 2010. Ashley M Wright, Matthew T Kapelewski, Stefan Marx, Omar K Farha, and William Morris. Transitioning metal–organic frameworks from the laboratory to market through applied research. 

Nature Materials , 24(2):178–187, 2025. Lianlian Wu, Bowei Yan, Junshan Han, Ruijiang Li, Jian Xiao, Song He, and Xiaochen Bo. TOXRIC: a comprehensive database of toxicological data and benchmarks. Nucleic acids research , 51(D1): D1432–D1445, 2023. Zhenpeng Yao, Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, N Scott Bobbitt, Benjamin J Bucior, Sai Govind Hari Kumar, Sean P Collins, Thomas Burns, Tom K Woo, Omar K Farha, Randall Q Snurr, et al. Inverse design of nanoporous crystalline reticular materials with deep generative models. Nature Machine Intelligence , 3(1):76–86, 2021. Claudio Zeni, Robert Pinsler, Daniel Zügner, Andrew Fowler, Matthew Horton, Xiang Fu, Zilong Wang, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Jonathan Crabbé, Shoko Ueda, et al. A generative model for inorganic materials design. Nature , 639(8055):624–632, 2025. Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 , 1(2):1–124, 2023. Zhiling Zheng, Nakul Rampal, Theo Jaffrelot Inizan, Christian Borgs, Jennifer T Chayes, and Omar M Yaghi. Large language models for reticular chemistry. Nature Reviews Materials , 10(5):369–381, 2025. Zihui Zhou, Tianqiong Ma, Heyang Zhang, Saumil Chheda, Haozhe Li, Kaiyu Wang, Sebastian Ehrling, Raynald Giovine, Chuanshuai Li, Ali H Alawadhi, et al. Carbon dioxide capture from open air using covalent organic frameworks. Nature , 635(8037):96–101, 2024. 45