Title: Equivariant Asynchronous Diffusion: An Adaptive Denoising Schedule for Accelerated Molecular Conformation Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.10093v1

Published Time: Thu, 12 Mar 2026 00:07:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
Preprint 

# EQUIVARIANT ASYNCHRONOUS DIFFUSION : A N ADAP -

# TIVE DENOISING SCHEDULE FOR ACCELERATED 

# MOLECULAR CONFORMATION GENERATION 

Junyi An 1∗

, Chao Qu 1, Yun-Fei Shi 1, Zhijian Zhou 2, Fenglei Cao 1, Yuan Qi 2

> 1

Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science, SAIS 

> 2

Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation (AI 3) Institute, Fudan University 

# ABSTRACT 

Recent 3D molecular generation methods primarily use asynchronous auto-regressive or synchronous diffusion models. While auto-regressive models build molecules sequentially, they’re limited by a short horizon and a discrepancy be-tween training and inference. Conversely, synchronous diffusion models denoise all atoms at once, offering a molecule-level horizon but failing to capture the causal relationships inherent in hierarchical molecular structures. We introduce Equivariant Asynchronous Diffusion (EAD) to overcome these limitations. EAD is a novel diffusion model that combines the strengths of both approaches: it uses an asynchronous denoising schedule to better capture molecular hierarchy while maintaining a molecule-level horizon. Since these relationships are often complex, we propose a dynamic scheduling mechanism to adaptively determine the denoising timestep. Experimental results show that EAD achieves state-of-the-art performance in 3D molecular generation. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in modeling complex data distributions, par-ticularly in domains such as images (Ho et al., 2020) and language (Lovelace et al., 2023). More recently, this paradigm has gained substantial traction in molecular structure generation, enabling key applications such as de novo molecular discovery (Hajduk & Greer, 2007) and property-guided design (Kang et al., 2006). Among the many proposed approaches, equivariant diffusion models (EDMs) (Hoogeboom et al., 2022) have emerged as a leading variant, distinguished by their ability to denoise 3D coordinates through SE(3)-equivariant graph neural networks (GNNs). Prior to the rise of diffusion models, auto-regressive (AR) models (Gebauer et al., 2019; Luo & Ji, 2022; Daigavane et al., 2024) appeared to offer a solution by iteratively predicting the next atom or fragment until a “STOP” symbol was generated. These approaches typically establish a hierarchical structure within the molecule and perform asynchronous generation, allowing key structures (e.g., molecular scaffolds) to emerge preferentially. However, they face two main limitations: (i) a lack of a global horizon, preventing the generation of molecules under desirable conditions, and (ii) inconsistencies between training and inference that can lead to issues such as significant error accumulation in large molecular generation. In contrast, full-molecule diffusion models (Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024) overcome these challenges by denoising all atoms synchronously, enabling global condition guidance and the generation of larger molecules. Nevertheless, these models overlook the hierarchical nature of molecular structures: small uncertainties in key components (e.g., scaffolds) can introduce significant uncertainties in modified regions (e.g., functional groups), potentially causing spatial inconsistencies such as incorrect atomic bonds or angles. Autoregressive and diffusion models exhibit complementary strengths, naturally prompting the question: Can they be combined to enable more flexible and rational molecular generation? 

Several approaches have explored this idea in domains such as language sequences and videos, where a Markov causal chain is integrated within the diffusion process, making the denoising of 

> ∗

e-mail: junyian0827@gmail.com 

1

> arXiv:2603.10093v1 [cs.LG] 10 Mar 2026

Preprint Denoise         

> Add noise
> Noise Level
> Mask
> Auto-Regressive Model Full-Molecue Diffusion EAD (Ours)
> Denoise Add noise Denoise Predict
> Training
> Sampling
> Predict Predict Denoise Denoise Denoise

Figure 1: Generation Processes Overview. Left: Autoregressive methods generate atoms sequen-tially, with each new atom’s generation conditioned on the previously generated, noise-free atoms. Middle: Full-molecule diffusion models denoise all atoms simultaneously, iteratively refining a sample of noisy atoms until they are all noise-free. Right: Our proposed EAD model combines the strengths of both approaches by using an asynchronous denoising process. This allows atoms to become noise-free sequentially, where the denoising direction for each atom can benefit from the information of atoms that have already reached a lower noise state. Details of their difference can be found in Section 3.2. subsequent tokens (or frames) dependent on those previously denoised (Wu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Song et al., 2025). However, training these methods is challenging due to the vast number of potential combinations in asynchronous timestep schedules. More importantly, this concept does not directly extend to molecular generation, as molecular data is represented as a graph, where causal relationships are implicit and significantly more complex. In this paper, we introduce the Equivariant Asynchronous Diffusion (EAD) model for 3D molecular structure generation, which incorporates a stable asynchronous noise training paradigm and a dynamic denoising strategy. During both training and inference, different atoms can be assigned different noise levels, allowing some atoms to be denoised earlier while still being guided by global conditions. To ensure stable training, we independently sample noise levels for each atom, while imposing a range constraint to prevent the model from learning implausible noise combinations during sampling. Additionally, we propose a dynamic denoising timestep schedule based on historical denoising steps to prioritize atoms for denoising during sampling. This approach enables the diffusion model to learn hierarchical relationships while effectively minimizing cumulative errors. Figure 1 illustrates the differences between EAD and traditional methods. Notably, EAD is a general diffusion method that is independent of model architecture. Our experiments demonstrate that EAD outperforms the synchronous denoising method EDM—using the same architecture and number of training iterations—across all molecular generation metrics, particularly in molecular-level properties, with an 8% increase in molecular stability and a 3% improvement in validity. Furthermore, EAD achieves competitive performance compared to other state-of-the-art generation methods. 

Contributions (i) EAD, a novel 3D molecular generation method that combines the strengths of both autoregressive and diffusion models; (ii) A stable asynchronous diffusion training strategy, coupled with a dynamic denoising timestep schedule that adapts based on historical denoising; and (iii) Empirical validation demonstrating EAD’s potential for generating complete, valid molecules. Specifically, we show that traditional full-molecule diffusion models are special cases of EAD, and that the EAD framework can be integrated into various diffusion architectures. 

# 2 PRELIMINARIES 

In this section, we provide a brief overview of 3D molecular generation methods. Additionally, we introduce the notations commonly used in the following sections. The symbol [·; ·] denotes concatenation, while q(·) and p(·) represent the transition distributions. The terms αt and σt refer 2Preprint to the noise schedule in the diffusion and generation processes. We use the term “clean” to refer to samples that are either noise-free or contain only a minimal amount of noise. 2.1 MOLECULAR AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELS 

The autoregressive model is a sequence generation model that predicts the next token based on historical information. The distribution of the i-th token is expressed as: 

xi ∼ pθ (xj<i ). (1) Sequence autoregression typically formulates a sequential prediction process as xi = ϕ(zi−1),where zi−1 represents the hidden state of the i − 1-th token, and ϕ(·) denotes a prediction model. However, this approach cannot be directly applied to molecular generation due to the uncertain interdependencies within the molecular graph structure. To address this challenge, (Gebauer et al., 2019) proposed an autoregressive generation method based on “focus atoms”. The focus atom serves as the chosen origin for that step of the generation process, and its index is predicted by an additional model g(·):

j = arg max  

> j<i

g(zj ). (2) Training g(·) involves transforming the molecular graph into a sequence of subgraphs and identifying the target atom within each subgraph. The atomic attributes (atomic type and 3D coordinates) of the recent atom can then be predicted as xi = ϕ(zj ). Note that atomic 3D coordinates lie in a continuous and unbounded space, there are two common methods for predicting them: (i) using the invariant features of multiple atoms to estimate coordinates (Gebauer et al., 2019; Luo & Ji, 2022), (ii) using an E(3)-equivariant GNN (Daigavane et al., 2024; Liao & Smidt, 2023) to directly predict the relative coordinates. Despite of graph generation, existing molecular autoregressive algorithms convert molecular graphs into subgraph sequences through algorithms such as depth-first search or nearest neighbor search. However, these methods fail to effectively represent the implicit hierarchical structure of molecules. In this work, we allow the model to adaptively identify the atoms that should be prioritized for denoising. 2.2 FULL -M OLECULE DIFFUSION MODELS 

Diffusion model is based on a process of gradually adding noise to data and then learning to denoise to reconstruct the original data. Equivariant diffusion model (EDM) first apply this technology on 3D molecular generation (Hoogeboom et al., 2022). Given a molecular data x = [ p; h] represented by atomic coordinates p and atomic types h on all the atoms, the noise process with diffusion step 

t ∈ { 0, ..., T } is defined as 

q(zt|x) = N (zt|αtx, σ 2 

> t

I), (3) where N is a product of normal distribution N p and N h. zt = [ zp 

> t

; zh 

> t

] denote the noised latent variable. In general, αt is modelled by a function that smoothly transitions from α0 ≈ 1 towards 

αT ≈ 0, while σt behaves in the opposite way. Together, they control how much true distribution and random noise are contained in the latent variable. Note that equation 3 is a full-molecule diffusion where all the atoms share the same t, αt and σt. Furthermore, EDM applies a common strategy where 

αt = √1 − σ2. This diffusion process is Markov and can be equivalently written with transition distributions as: 

q(zt|zs) = N (zt|αt|szs, σ 2

> t|s

I), (4) for any t > s with αt|s = αt/α s and σ2 

> t|s

= σ2 

> t

− α2

> t|s

σ2 

> s

. Hence, the entire noising process is then written as: 

q(z0, z1, . . . , zT |x) = q(z0|x) YTt=1 q(zt|zt−1). (5) The posterior of the transitions conditioned on x gives the inverse of the noising process. It is also normal and given by: 

q(zs|x, zt) = N (zs|μt→s(x, zt), σ 2

> t→s

I), (6) where the definitions for μt→s(x, zt) and σt→s can be analytically obtained as        

> μt→s(x,zt) = αt|sσ2
> s
> σ2
> t
> zt+αsσ2
> t|s
> σ2
> t
> x,σt→s=σt|sσs
> σt

3Preprint 

Algorithm 1 Asynchronous Diffusion Training  

> 1:

loop  

> 2:

Sample a molecule ([ x1; h1], ..., [xM ; hM ]) 

from dataset D. The asynchronous interval is C. 

> 3:

Sample a baseline noise level t∗ from 

U(0 , ..., T ). 

> 4:

for i = 1 , ..., M do  

> 5:

ti = Clamp( tci + t∗) 

> 6:

Sample tci from [−M, M ]. 

> 7:

Sample noise ϵi ∼ N (0, I) 

> 8:

Extract αti and σti from schedule.  

> 9:

zi = αti [xi; hi] + σti ϵi 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Concatenate atomic representation zi to z. 

> 12:

Compute ϵθ = ϕ(z, [ti; ... ; tM ])  

> 13:

Minimize ∥[ϵ1; ... ; ϵM ] − [ϵθ

> 1

; ... ; ϵθM ]∥2 

> 14:

end loop Algorithm 2 Asynchronous Sampling                                                                                               

> 1: Input: Model ϕ(·), denoising history h=N one .2: Initialize: Maximum iteration K, denoising iter-ation k=K,zK∼ N (0,I), atom-wise timstep
> t= [ T+ 1; ... ;T+ 1] , asynchronous ratio λ.3: while PMi=1 tM>0or k > 0do
> 4: if k > (λK )then
> 5: t:= t−1
> 6: else
> 7: v= Compare( h,h∗), and t:= t−v
> 8: end if
> 9: t:= Clamp( t), and s=t−1
> 10: Sample ϵ∼ N (0,I)
> 11: zk−1=1
> αt|szk−σ2
> t|s
> αt|sσtϕ(zk,t) + σt→sϵ
> 12: Compute h∗by g(zk−1,zk)and update h
> 13: k:= k−1
> 14: end while
> 15: Sample x,h∼p(x,h|z0)
> 16: Return x,h.

In equation 6, the distribution of the latent variable zs can be computed by μt→s(x, zt). However, since x is unknown during generation, it is replaced by a dynamic function ˆx = ϕ(zt, t ), where ϕ(·)

is a GNN. The denoising distribution is then expressed as: 

p(zs|zt) = N (zs|μt→s(ˆ x, zt), σ 2

> t→s

I). (7) The neural network is optimized using L(x, ϕ (zt, t )) based on the true data distribution. EDM adopts a similar approach, but instead of directly estimating the posterior, it predicts the noise: 

ϵp, ϵh = ϕ(zt, t ) − [zp 

> t

; 0], (8) where the attribute noise ϵh is predicted directly, and the positional noise is computed by subtracting the input coordinates. This ensures that the output resides within a zero-centered gravity subspace. After optimization, EDM employs a standard denoising procedure with s = t − 1, where all atoms follow the same denoising schedule. As illustrated in Figure 1(2), EDM as a full-molecule diffusion method does not account for the atom order; rather, all atoms are optimized simultaneously into noise-free states by the end of the process. Further details on 3D molecular diffusion, including SO(3)-equivariance, dynamic models, and optimization conditions, are provided in the Appendix A. 

# 3 EQUIVARIANT ASYNCHRONOUS DIFFUSION MODEL 

In this section, we first make a review of hierarchical structure in molecule to detail our motivation. Then, we introduction the formulation of our EAD and clarify its properties. 3.1 REVISITING THE HIERARCHICAL STRUCTURE IN MOLECULE 

The structure of organic molecules is inherently hierarchical, comprised of functional groups and structural scaffolds that form a complex, interconnected whole (Lim et al., 2020). This hierarchical nature also exists at the atomic level, where atoms like carbon and oxygen play a different, more foundational role than hydrogen atoms. Some motif-based graph methods (Zhang et al., 2021; 2023) have leveraged these hierarchies to create more effective molecular representations. In generation tasks, hierarchical structures used to construct causal chains to determine the priority of atom generation (Daigavane et al., 2024). This is in contrast to domains like language or video, where the explicit sequential order of tokens or frames introduces a clear causal relationship (Chen et al., 2024; Song et al., 2025). However, the relationships within a molecular hierarchy are implicit and represented by a graph, which lacks a fixed order. Consequently, imposing a rigid, chain-like denoising order would misrepresent the multifaceted nature of molecular formation, which is defined by multiple potential paths rather than a single linear one. We empirically confirm this claim in 4Preprint Section 5.4. In this work, we define a more flexible approach to finding the order of molecular generation. Based on the diffusion framework, we can dynamically adjust priorities during the denoising process. 3.2 THE DIFFUSION PROCESS 

The process of generating a 3D molecule requires simultaneously modeling two types of data: discrete atomic types ( h) and continuous coordinates ( p). The latent variables, which include noise, are defined as zti = [ zt, (p) 

> i

; zt, (h) 

> i

], where i denotes the atom index and t ∈ [0 , T ] denotes the noise level or noise timestep. A common approach is to use E(n)-Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (EGNNs) (Satorras et al., 2021c) to model the dynamics of this diffusion process, a method that has shown success in 3D tasks (Hoogeboom et al., 2022). Our model adopts this dynamic architecture, whose full-molecule diffusion is given by: 

ϵθi = ϕ({ztj |j ∈ 1, ..., M }, t ). (9) This formulation predicts the noise ϵθi for atom i based on the state of all atoms in the molecule at the same noise level t. However, this holistic dependence, which is a hallmark of full-sequence diffusion methods (Ho et al., 2022; Janner et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), can create a significant challenge: it may lead to inconsistencies and physically implausible relationships between neighboring atoms in the generated structure. 

Independent Noise Level Unsynchronized denoising is a critical component of the EAD model. To achieve this, we apply diverse noise levels to the different atoms during the diffusion process, simliar to (Chen et al., 2024). Specifically, for the i-th atom, the corresponding latent variables zi,t i

are defined as: 

q(zti 

> i

|xi) = N (zti 

> i

|αti xi, σ 2 

> ti

I), (10) where ti is independently sampled from U(0 , ..., T ). This setup allows the dynamic model to capture all possible combinations of atomic noise levels. However, training this model is intuitively more challenging than training full-molecule diffusion methods, as the number of possible noise combinations is significantly greater than that of synchronous diffusion. We present a constrained independent sampling method designed to optimize training efficiency, as detailed in Algorithm 1. The procedure is initiated by sampling a global noise level t∗ from a uniform distribution U(0 , ..., T ). Subsequently, a narrow asynchronous interval [−C, C ], with C ≪ T , is usually defined as the maximal molecular size in training set. For each atom, a local noise offset 

tci is independently sampled from this interval. The final noise level for atom i is then determined by ti = tci + t∗. All noise levels are clamped to the range [0 , T ] to ensure adherence to the valid parameter space. In the following, we use the vector t = [ t0, ...t M ] to denote the noise level of molecule, and the dynamic function becomes ϵθ = ϕ(zt, t) containing state of all atoms. This strategy significantly reduces the combinatorial complexity of noise configurations from O(T M ) to 

O((2 C)M ), with the primary objective of guiding the model to learn a more constrained and probable subset of asynchronous noise levels. We further impose explicit constraints on the sampling process to ensure consistency. As our experimental findings in Section 5 demonstrate, this approach yields a significant improvement in sampling performance over the base EDM model, without requiring additional training epochs. 

Optimization Objective During training, we noise data distribution according to equation 10 and use the dynamic model to learn denoising. The loss function for this process can be expressed as: 

LDif f = E

> t,x,ϵ

1

M

XMi=1 

h

∥ϵi − ϕ(zt, t)i∥2i

, (11) where ϵi ∼ N (0, σ 2 

> t

I). Additionally, we incorporate common techniques such as the likeli-hood term L0 = log p(x|z0) and the distribution distance of the final latent variable, LF inal =

−KL (q(zT |x), p (zT)) (Hoogeboom et al., 2022). Compared to full-molecule diffusion, the training of EAD represents a more universal learning paradigm. It learns across diverse noise levels, which enables the use of various denoising timestep schedules during sampling without the need for model retraining. In our experiments 5Preprint in Section 5.4, we evaluated synchronous schedule, manual asynchronous schedule, and adaptive asynchronous schedules, all of which performed well. Importantly, these results were achieved with a single training run. 

Variable-Size Generation Full-molecule diffusion methods typically require molecules to be padded with “dummy atoms” during training. These atoms are usually not involved in the model’s computations but serve to define the molecule’s size during the sampling phase. While (Hoogeboom et al., 2022) proposed a method that pre-samples the number of dummy atoms to generate different molecular sizes, this approach is not sufficiently flexible, particularly in scenarios where the level of target molecular size is unknown. Our EDM model introduces a new method for variable-size generation by actively including dummy atoms in the computational process, allowing the model to learn their denoising dynamics. Given that dummy atoms function as “STOP” symbols that should appear only after valid atoms, we increase the likelihood of them being assigned higher noise levels during training process. Specifically, we modify the independent noise sampling for dummy atoms, giving it a 50% probability of being drawn from 

[0 , C ] instead of the standard [−C, C ]. This design empowers our model to automatically predict the molecular size and ensures that it prioritizes the generation of valid molecular structures during the sampling process. 3.3 SAMPLING 

We outline the sampling process for EAD in Algorithm 2. This method continuously updates a denoising history state h that guides the independent denoising trajectory of each atom. We partition the total denoising process in into two stages. The first stage begins with a standard Gaussian noise representation zK , setting the noise level of all atoms to T . We first iteratively perform synchronous denoising for a certain step to obtain a preliminary state for the subsequent stage. In the second stage, each atom leverages its historical state hi to determine whether to advance its current noise level. This historical state encodes the feature dynamics of the i-th atom during denoising and can be conceptualized as the velocity of its corresponding atomic distribution. We define the velocity of i-th atom as 

h∗ = g(zk−1 

> i

, zki ) = ∥zk−1 

> i

− zki ∥2. (12) The denoising process corresponds to a progressive transition from a noise distribution to a clean data distribution (Song et al., 2020). A key property of this convergence is that the velocity of the distribution should asymptotically approach zero. Based on this principle, we flag atoms whose velocity does not exhibit a monotonic decrease. For these “stalled” atoms, we pause their noise timestep, performing multiple denoising steps at the same noise level until a stable downward velocity trend is re-established. Compare( ·) in Algorithm 2 is used to assess the convergence of the velocity, which is defined as 

Compare( hi, h∗ 

> i

) = 

1 if h∗ 

> i

≤ min( hi)0 otherwise. (13) Here h retains the most recent portion of the velocity through a window of size w. This adaptive mechanism allows for the automatic generation of a molecular hierarchy during the denoising process, where the most structurally resolved components are fully denoised first ( ti = 0 ). 

Boundary During training, we define the asynchronous interval as [−C, C ]. To prevent combina-tions that exceed this interval during sampling, we clamp noise levels of all atoms within a molecule to the interval [min( t1, ..., t M ), min( t1, ..., t M ) + 2 C]. This clamp forcibly advance noise levels of atoms whose velocity remains unstable for a long time. Additionally, for atoms that are already clean (ti = 0 ), we freeze their features to prevent them from deviating from the correct data distribution. 

# 4 RELATED WORK 

Most methods for 3D molecular structure generation fall into one of two broad categories: autore-gressive and end-to-end models. 6Preprint 

Autoregressive Methods G-SchNet (Gebauer et al., 2019; 2022) and G-SphereNet (Luo & Ji, 2022) were early successes in autoregressive molecular structure generation. G-SchNet uses the SchNet (Sch ¨utt et al., 2017) framework with rotationally invariant features for message passing, generating node embeddings. Atoms in the current fragment then ”vote” on the next atom’s placement within a 3D grid by specifying radial distances from a central ”focus node.” However, this approach requires at least three atoms for triangulation due to the rotationally invariant features, necessitating additional tokens to break symmetry. G-SphereNet similarly performs triangulation using normalizing flows once three atoms are present. SYMPHONY (Daigavane et al., 2024) addresses this limitation with higher-degree E(3)-equivariant features, which describe atomic states more completely and thus eliminate the need for triangulation. 

Diffusion-based Methods We focus on the diffusion end-to-end models, which is closely related to ours. Diffusion models are designed to learning to reverse a process that progressively adds noise to molecular structures until a simple, tractable distribution is reached. The model then learns to denoise, enabling the generation of new molecules through iterative refinement. GeoDiff (Xu et al., 2022) generates 3D molecular conformations in Euclidean space. TorsionDiff (Jing et al., 2022) applies the diffusion process to torsion angles while keeping other degrees of freedom fixed. EDM (Hoogeboom et al., 2022) denoises both continuous atomic coordinates and categorical atom types. GEOLDM (Xu et al., 2023) extends this by performing diffusion in the latent space of an equivariant Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE). Researchers have also explored equivariant neural networks within the diffusion framework for tasks like molecular linker design (Igashov et al., 2024), leveraging E(3) equivariance to ensure consistency with molecular symmetries (e.g., rotations and translations) and improve physical plausibility. 

# 5 EXPERIMENTS 

In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of EAD across diverse generation tasks, datasets, and sampling strategies. We compare our model with a variety of diffusion-based methods that operate in 3D space, including EDM (Hoogeboom et al., 2022), EDM’s non-equivariant variant GDM, EDM-Bridge (Wu et al., 2022), GeoLDM (Xu et al., 2023), and UniGEM (Feng et al., 2025), which is the most architecturally similar to our approach. For a broader comparison, we also include other prominent generative methods: the flow-based E-NF (Garcia Satorras et al., 2021) and the autoregressive G-SchNet (Gebauer et al., 2022). Table 1: Comparison of generation performance on the QM9 dataset, including atom stability, molecule stability, validity, and validity*uniqueness. Higher values indicate better performance. Gray shading denotes the base model used for EAD. Model Atom sta(%) Mol sta(%) Valid(%) V*U(%) Sec./sample E-NF 85.0 4.9 40.2 39.4 -G-Schnet 95.7 68.1 85.5 80.3 -EDM 98.7 ±0.1% 82.0 ±0.4% 91.9 ±0.5% 90.7 ±0.6% 0.20 GDM 97.6 71.6 90.4 89.5 -EDM-Bridge 98.8 84.6 92.0 90.7 -GeoLDM 98.9 89.4 93.8 92.7 -UniGEM 99.0 89.8 95.0 93.2 -EAD (Ours) 99.0 ±0.1% 90.3 ±0.1% 95.1 ±0.2% 93.2 ±0.2% 0.21 Data 99.0 95.2 97.7 97.7 -5.1 RESULTS ON QM9 

Dataset and Configurations We evaluate EAD’s generative capabilities on the QM9 dataset (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014), a standard 3D molecular dataset containing 130k small molecules with up to nine heavy atoms, including molecular properties and atomic coordinates. EAD is trained to generate molecules with 3D coordinates and atom types (H, C, N, O, F). We use the train/validation/test splits from (Anderson et al., 2019), consisting of 100k, 18k, and 13k samples, respectively. The diffusion process uses T = 1000 steps, the asynchronous ratio is set to 0.8 and the 7Preprint sampling window is w = 2 . Further configuration follow the EDM (Hoogeboom et al., 2022) whose details are in Appendix C.1. 

Metrics We evaluate our model by sampling 10,000 molecules and measuring four key metrics: atom stability, molecule stability, validity, and uniqueness. First, inter-atomic distances are used to predict bond types. Atom stability is then defined as the percentage of atoms with correct valency, while molecule stability is the fraction of generated molecules where every atom is stable. Validity and uniqueness are determined by first converting the 3D molecular structures to SMILES format using RDKit. Uniqueness is then calculated as the ratio of unique molecules among all valid, non-duplicate samples. 

Results Table 1 provides a performance comparison of EAD against several state-of-the-art diffusion-based methods. From our experiments, we draw three primary conclusions. First, EAD demonstrates superior performance across all evaluated metrics, with its generated molecules closely approximating the distribution of the true dataset. Second, the model exhibits excellent stability, as indicated by the consistently low variance observed across repeated experiments. Third, and most notably, EAD achieves a significant improvement in molecular stability (8.3%) and validity (3.2%) when compared to its base model, EDM, despite being trained with an identical configuration. We note that EAD’s sampling time is marginally longer than EDM’s due to the additional denoising iterations, with all sampling performed on an Nvidia H800. This increase in computational cost is justified by the substantial improvement in generation quality. Table 2: Comparison of generation performance on GEOM-DRUG dataset. Metrics EDM GDM EDM-Bridge GeoLDM UniGEM EAD (Ours) Atom sta(%) 81.3 77.7 82.4 84.4 85.1 86.3 

Valid(%) 92.6 91.8 92.8 99.3 98.4 99.1 5.2 RESULTS ON GEOM-D RUG 

Dataset and Configurations We further evaluate EAD’s ability to generate large molecules using the GEOM-Drug dataset (Axelrod & Gomez-Bombarelli, 2020) (GEOM). This dataset comprises 430,000 molecules with up to 181 atoms (averaging 44.4 atoms per molecule). Each molecule has multiple conformers and associated energies. Following the configuration in (Hoogeboom et al., 2022), we retain the 30 lowest-energy conformers for each molecule. The models learn to generate the 3D positions and atom types. Additional configuration details are in Appendix C.1. 

Results The GEOM dataset is a more challenging benchmark compared to QM9, as its larger molecules and non-equilibrium conformations introduce complexities for bond type prediction and validity assessment based on interatomic distances. Consistent with prior work (Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2025), our evaluation prioritizes molecular stability and validity. As depicted in Table 2, EAD achieves state-of-the-art performance in molecular stability. For the validity metric, it is important to note that RDKit’s aggregation of valid molecular fragments can lead to inflated scores across methods. Despite this, EAD secured the second-highest score, with a minimal difference of 0.2% from the leading method and 0.9% from the maximum possible value (100%). 5.3 CONDITIONAL GENERATION 

Configurations In this section, we verify the effectiveness of EAD in conditional generation. We introduce molecular properties as conditions into EAD using classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022). To ensure a fair comparison, the experimental configuration and the predictive models for evaluation are consistent with those in (Hoogeboom et al., 2022). The QM9 dataset is partitioned into two sets: one for training the EGNN-based property prediction models, φ(·), and the other for training the EAD generation model. Finally, we use φ(·) to evaluate 10,000 molecules generated by EAD. 8Preprint 

Results Table 3 presents the results of our conditional generation experiments. The “#Atoms” baseline represents a simple model that predicts molecular properties using only the number of atoms. The upper bound on performance, “QM9 (L-bound)”, indicates the direct prediction using φ(·) on the training data used for generation. We observed that EAD achieved the leading performance across all conditions. Notably, EAD’s average improvement is greater than 30% compared to the base model EDM. Table 3: Mean Absolute Error for molecular property prediction by a EGNN classifier ϕc on a QM9 subset.                                 

> Task α∆ε ε HOMO εLUMO μCv
> Units Bohr 3meV meV meV Dcal mol K#Atoms 3.86 866 426 813 1.053 1.971 EDM 2.76 655 356 584 1.111 1.101 GeoLDM 2.37 587 340 522 1.108 1.025 EAD 2.24 564 318 516 0.999 0.945
> QM9 (L-bound) 0.10 64 39 36 0.043 0.040

Table 4: Comparison of different sampling strategies. Sampling strategy Atom sta(%) Mol sta(%) Valid(%) V*U(%) Synchronous schedule 98.7 81.9 91.9 90.2 Manual asynchronous schedule 90.5 64.0 87.2 81.7 Adaptive asynchronous schedule 99.0 90.3 95.1 93.2 5.4 ABLATION STUDY 

This section presents ablation studies to investigate key characteristics of EAD, including the univer-sality of its training paradigm and the impact of sampling hyperparameters. 

Training Paradigm Following the training strategy outlined in Section 3.2, we generated 10,000 molecules using synchronous, manually asynchronous, and adaptive asynchronous schedules. The manual timestep schedule employed a step-like noise pattern from (Chen et al., 2024), with details provided in Appendix C.2. From Table 4, we draw two conclusions. First, the synchronous schedule yields results comparable to EDM, confirming that our training paradigm is general enough to encompass synchronous diffusion. Second, the manual asynchronous schedule performs worse, demonstrating that the implicit relationships within a molecular hierarchy cannot be effectively captured by a simple, predetermined schedule. This ablation confirms the universality of our training paradigm while highlighting the need for a carefully designed asynchronous strategy. 

Sampling Hyperparameters EAD’s performance is governed by two key hyperparameters: the asynchronous ratio λ and the history window w. Results in Table 5 show that a large asynchronous ratio can negatively impact performance, indicating that a relatively good initial state, achieved through sufficient synchronous denoising steps, is crucial before applying asynchronous modifications. Furthermore, a larger history window can impair the dynamic schedule’s judgment, leading to a decline in performance. Table 5: Comparison of different hyper-parameter configuration. Gray grid denotes the default configuration. Configuration Mol sta(%) Valid(%) Configuration Mol sta(%) Valid(%) 

λ = 0 .8, w = 2 90.3 95.1 λ = 0 .9, w = 2 89.1 94.0 

λ = 0 .8, w = 1 90.0 94.8 λ = 0 .6, w = 2 64.7 79.5 

λ = 0 .8, w = 5 80.4 90.5 λ = 0 .4, w = 2 12.5 36.4 

λ = 0 .8, w = 10 60.2 77.8 λ = 0 .2, w = 2 0.5 20.8 

# 6 CONCLUSION 

We present EAD, a novel model for 3D molecular generation that employs an asynchronous denoising paradigm. Our experimental results demonstrate that EAD achieves state-of-the-art performance, 9Preprint offering a promising direction for future research in molecular diffusion. A limitation of our approach is its sensitivity to the asynchronous ratio hyperparameter λ. Future work will focus on developing more robust and adaptive denoising strategies to overcome this limitation. 

# REFERENCES 

Brandon Anderson, Truong Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. Cormorant: Covariant molecular neu-ral networks. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alch ´e-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran As-sociates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/ 03573b32b2746e6e8ca98b9123f2249b-Paper.pdf .Simon Axelrod and Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli. Geom: Energy-annotated molecular conformations for property prediction and molecular generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05531 , 2020. Boyuan Chen, Diego Marti Monso, Yilun Du, Max Simchowitz, Russ Tedrake, and Vincent Sitz-mann. Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01392 , 2024. Ameya Daigavane, Song Eun Kim, Mario Geiger, and Tess Smidt. Symphony: Symmetry-equivariant point-centered spherical harmonics for 3d molecule generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Shikun Feng, Yuyan Ni, Lu yan, Zhi-Ming Ma, Wei-Ying Ma, and Yanyan Lan. UniGEM: A unified approach to generation and property prediction for molecules. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, Fabian Fuchs, Ingmar Posner, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant normalizing flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:4181–4192, 2021. Niklas Gebauer, Michael Gastegger, and Kristof Sch ¨utt. Symmetry-adapted generation of 3d point sets for the targeted discovery of molecules. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. Niklas W. A. Gebauer, Michael Gastegger, Stefaan S. P. Hessmann, Klaus-Robert M ¨uller, and Kristof T. Sch ¨utt. Inverse design of 3d molecular structures with conditional generative neural net-works. 13, February 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28526-y .Philip J Hajduk and Jonathan Greer. A decade of fragment-based drug design: strategic advances and lessons learned. Nature reviews Drug discovery , 6(3):211–219, 2007. Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 ,2022. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11239 , 2020. Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:8633–8646, 2022. Emiel Hoogeboom, Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Cl ´ement Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant diffusion for molecule generation in 3d. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 8867–8887. PMLR, 2022. Lei Huang, Tingyang Xu, Yang Yu, Peilin Zhao, Xingjian Chen, Jing Han, Zhi Xie, Hailong Li, Wenge Zhong, Ka-Chun Wong, et al. A dual diffusion model enables 3d molecule generation and lead optimization based on target pockets. Nature Communications , 15(1):2657, 2024. Ilia Igashov, Hannes St ¨ark, Cl ´ement Vignac, Arne Schneuing, Victor Garcia Satorras, Pascal Frossard, Max Welling, Michael Bronstein, and Bruno Correia. Equivariant 3d-conditional diffusion model for molecular linker design. Nature Machine Intelligence , pp. 1–11, 2024. 10 Preprint Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991 , 2022. Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional diffusion for molecular conformer generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:24240–24253, 2022. Kisuk Kang, Ying Shirley Meng, Julien Breger, Clare P Grey, and Gerbrand Ceder. Electrodes with high power and high capacity for rechargeable lithium batteries. Science , 311(5763):977–980, 2006. Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00630 , 2, 2021. Xiang Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Diffusion-lm improves controllable text generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 4328–4343, 2022. Yi-Lun Liao and Tess Smidt. Equiformer: Equivariant graph attention transformer for 3d atomistic graphs. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Jaechang Lim, Sang-Yeon Hwang, Seokhyun Moon, Seungsu Kim, and Woo Youn Kim. Scaffold-based molecular design with a graph generative model. Chemical science , 11(4):1153–1164, 2020. Justin Lovelace, Varsha Kishore, Chao Wan, Eliot Shekhtman, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Latent diffusion for language generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 56998–57025, 2023. Youzhi Luo and Shuiwang Ji. An Autoregressive Flow Model for 3D Molecular Geometry Generation from Scratch. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=C03Ajc-NS5W .Alex Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09672 , 2021. Raghunathan Ramakrishnan, Pavlo O Dral, Matthias Rupp, and O Anatole Von Lilienfeld. Quantum chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Scientific data , 1(1):1–7, 2014. Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, Fabian Fuchs, Ingmar Posner, and Max Welling. E(n) equivariant normalizing flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34, 2021a. Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural networks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09844 , 2021b. Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural networks. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 9323–9332, 2021c. Kristof T. Sch ¨utt, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Huziel E. Sauceda, Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre Tkatchenko, and Klaus-Robert M ¨uller. SchNet: A continuous-filter convolutional neural network for modeling quantum interactions, 2017. Kiwhan Song, Boyuan Chen, Max Simchowitz, Yilun Du, Russ Tedrake, and Vincent Sitzmann. History-guided video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06764 , 2025. Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456 , 2020. Lemeng Wu, Chengyue Gong, Xingchao Liu, Mao Ye, and qiang liu. Diffusion-based molecule generation with informative prior bridges. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. 11 Preprint Tong Wu, Zhihao Fan, Xiao Liu, Hai-Tao Zheng, Yeyun Gong, Jian Jiao, Juntao Li, Jian Guo, Nan Duan, Weizhu Chen, et al. Ar-diffusion: Auto-regressive diffusion model for text generation. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:39957–39974, 2023. Minkai Xu, Lantao Yu, Yang Song, Chence Shi, Stefano Ermon, and Jian Tang. Geodiff: A geometric diffusion model for molecular conformation generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PzcvxEMzvQC .Minkai Xu, Alexander S Powers, Ron O Dror, Stefano Ermon, and Jure Leskovec. Geometric latent diffusion models for 3d molecule generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pp. 38592–38610, 2023. Zaixi Zhang, Qi Liu, Hao Wang, Chengqiang Lu, and Chee-Kong Lee. Motif-based graph self-supervised learning for molecular property prediction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:15870–15882, 2021. Zaixi Zhang, Yaosen Min, Shuxin Zheng, and Qi Liu. Molecule generation for target protein binding with structural motifs. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. 12 Preprint 

# APPENDIX 

A Supplementary Preliminaries 13 

A.1 Details of 3D molecular diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 A.2 SO(3) Equivariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 A.3 Equivariant Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

B Model Details 15 

B.1 Molecular Scaffold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 B.2 Conditional Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

C Details of Experiments and Supplementary Experiments 15 

C.1 Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 C.2 Manual Timestep Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 C.3 Supplementary Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

# A SUPPLEMENTARY PRELIMINARIES 

A.1 DETAILS OF 3D MOLECULAR DIFFUSION 

A.1.1 NOISE SCHEDULE 

In this work, we follow the noise schedule in EDM (Hoogeboom et al., 2022). A diffusion process requires defining αt and σt for t = 0 , . . . , T . Given the relationship αt = p1 − σ2 

> t

, it is sufficient to specify αt. This parameter should decrease monotonically, starting near α0 ≈ 1 and ending at 

αT ≈ 0. In this work, we define αt as: 

αt = (1 − 2s) · f (t) + s, where f (t) = 1 − (t/T )2,

with a precision value of 10 −5 to prevent numerical instability. This schedule resembles the cosine noise schedule proposed in (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021), but our formulation is notationally simpler. To further ensure numerical stability during sampling, we adopt the clipping procedure from (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021). Specifically, we compute αt|t−1 = αt/α t−1, with α−1 = 1 . The values α2

> t|t−1

are clipped from below at 0.001 , ensuring that 1/α t|t−1 remains bounded during sampling. The αt

values are then reconstructed using the cumulative product αt = Qtτ =0 ατ |τ −1.The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as SNR( t) = α2 

> t

/σ 2 

> t

. Following (Kingma et al., 2021), we introduce the negative log-SNR curve γ(t) = −(log α2 

> t

− log σ2 

> t

), where σ2 

> t

= 1 − α2 

> t

. This function, 

γ(t), is monotonically increasing and allows for precise computation of all necessary components. For example: • α2 

> t

= sigmoid( −γ(t)) ,• σ2 

> t

= sigmoid( γ(t)) ,• SNR( t) = exp( −γ(t)) .A.1.2 OPTIMIZATION OBJECTIVE 

Recall that the distribution of the diffusion reverse process is represented as: 

p(zs|zt) = N (zs|μt→s( ˆ x, zt), σ 2

> t→s

I). (14) With the choice s = t − 1, a variational lower bound on the log-likelihood of x given the generative model is given by: 

log p(x) ≥ L 0 + Lbase + XTt=1 Lt, (15) 13 Preprint where L0 = log p(x|z0) models the likelihood of the data given z0, Lbase = −KL( q(zT |x)|p(zT )) 

models the distance between a standard normal distribution and the final latent variable q(zT |x), and 

Lt = −KL( q(zs|x, zt)|p(zs|zt)) for t = 1 , . . . , T. 

While in this formulation the neural network directly predicts ˆx, (Ho et al., 2020) found that optimization is easier when predicting the Gaussian noise instead. Intuitively, the network is trying to predict which part of the observation zt is noise originating from the diffusion process, and which part corresponds to the underlying data point x. Specifically, if zt = αtx + σtϵ, then the neural network ϕ outputs ˆϵ = ϕ(zt, t ), so that: 

ˆx = (1 /α t) zt − (σt/α t) ˆ ϵ (16) As shown in (Kingma et al., 2021), with this parametrization Lt simplifies to: 

Lt = Eϵ∼N (0,I)

h 12 (1 − SNR( t − 1) /SNR( t)) || ϵ − ˆϵ|| 2i

(17) In practice the term Lbase is close to zero when the noising schedule is defined in such a way that 

αT ≈ 0. Furthermore, if α0 ≈ 1 and x is discrete, then L0 is close to zero as well. A.2 SO(3) E QUIVARIANCE 

Given any transformation parameter g ∈ G, a function φ : X → Y is called equivariant to g if it satisfies: 

T ′(g)[ φ(x)] = φ(T (g)[ x]) , (18) where T ′(g) : Y → Y and T (g) : X → X denote the corresponding transformations over Y and X ,respectively. Invariance is a special case of equivariance where T ′(g) is an identity transformation. In this paper, we mainly focus on the SO (3) equivariance and invariance, since it is closely related to the inductive bias of molecules 1. In other words. The backbone and prediction head should adhere to equation 18. A.3 EQUIVARIANT MODEL 

EDM utilizes a lightweight neural network known as E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (EGNNs) (Satorras et al., 2021b), and we adopt this approach in our work. EGNNs are a specialized type of Graph Neural Network designed to satisfy the equivariance constraint. In our framework, we model interactions among all atoms by constructing a fully connected graph G,where each node vi ∈ V represents an atom. Each node vi is associated with 3D coordinates xi ∈ R3

and feature vectors hi ∈ Rd.The core of EGNNs lies in the Equivariant Convolutional Layers (EGCL) , which iteratively update node coordinates and features. Specifically, the (l + 1) -th layer updates are computed as: 

mij = ϕe

 hli, hlj , d 2 

> ij

, a ij 

 , hl+1  

> i

= ϕh

hli, X 

> j̸=i

˜eij mij 

 ,

xl+1  

> i

= xli + X 

> j̸=i

xli − xlj

dij + 1 ϕx

 hli, hlj , d 2 

> ij

, a ij 

 , (19) where l denotes the layer index, dij = ∥xli − xlj ∥2 is the Euclidean distance between nodes vi and 

vj , and aij represents optional edge attributes. To enhance numerical stability, the coordinate update in equation 19 normalizes the difference (xli − xlj ) by dij + 1 , following the approach in (Satorras et al., 2021a). Additionally, an attention mechanism infers soft edge weights ˜eij = ϕinf (mij ).All learnable components— ϕe, ϕh, ϕx, and ϕinf —are implemented as fully connected neural networks. The overall EGNN architecture comprises L EGCL layers, which collectively apply a non-linear transformation to the input coordinates and features: ˆx, ˆh = EGNN[ x0, h0]. This transformation inherently satisfies the equivariance property. 

> 1Invariance of translation is trivially satisfied by taking the relative positions as inputs.

14 Preprint 

# B MODEL DETAILS 

B.1 MOLECULAR SCAFFOLD 

A molecular scaffold is a core structural framework of a molecule that defines its essential topology and connectivity, while abstracting away specific functional groups or substituents. Scaffolds are widely used in cheminformatics and drug discovery to classify and analyze molecules based on their structural similarities. By focusing on the scaffold, researchers can identify common structural motifs across diverse compounds, which is particularly useful for understanding structure-activity relationships (SAR) and designing new molecules with desired properties. There are several types of scaffolds, including: • Murcko Scaffolds: Introduced by Bemis and Murcko, this scaffold is derived by removing all side chains and retaining only the ring systems and linkers between them. • Framework Scaffolds: Similar to Murcko scaffolds but may include additional structural features like non-ring linkers. • Generic Scaffolds: Further abstract the structure by replacing specific atoms or bonds with generic placeholders. 

Implementation RDKit is a powerful open-source cheminformatics toolkit that provides tools for working with molecular structures, including scaffold extraction. We can use the Murcko scaffolds using RDKit: 

from r d k i t . Chem import S c a f f o l d s s c a f f o l d = S c a f f o l d s . M u r c k o S c a f f o l d . G e t S c a f f o l d F o r M o l ( mol ) B.2 CONDITIONAL GENERATION 

EAD’s ability to generate molecules of variable size significantly enhances its potential for conditional generation. Given a target molecular property y, the denoising distribution can be written as zs ∼

pθ (zs|zt, y ). Some chemical properties, such as absolute energy, are closely tied to the size of the molecule. EAD can automatically determine the optimal size that aligns with the desired property. Moreover, by capturing the relationship between molecular size and properties, EAD is capable of generating molecules with properties that fall outside the distribution observed during training. In contrast, methods like EDM (Hoogeboom et al., 2022), which perform denoising based on randomly sampled sizes, may fail to discover the optimal molecular structure. Furthermore, the dual sampling of both size and properties in EDM introduces additional computational overhead. 

# C DETAILS OF EXPERIMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTS 

C.1 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

QM9. On QM9, the EAD is trained using a causal EGNN with 256 hidden features and 9 layers. The models are trained for 3000 epochs with a batch size of 1024 . The models are saved every 50 epochs when the validation loss is lower than the previously obtained number. The diffusion process uses 

T = 1000 . Training takes approximately 2 days on two NVIDIA H800 GPUs. 

GEOM. On GEOM, the EAD is trained using a causal EGNN with 256 hidden features and 4 layers. The models are trained for 13 epochs, which is around 1.2 million iterations with a batch size of 64 .Training takes approximately 5 days on four NVIDIA H800 GPUs. C.2 MANUAL TIMESTEP SCHEDULE 

In this section, we provide a handcrafted asynchronous schedule, which is used in our ablation study. This schedule originates from asynchronous denoising in the video domain (Chen et al., 2024), where videos have explicit causal chains. Following the pattern of videos, this schedule applies higher noise 15 Preprint 

Figure 2: Extra samples generated by EAD trained on the QM9 dataset. levels to the later frames in the sequence. This scheduling matrix defined as: 

K =

                                 

> T... TT... T... T... TT−1... T−1T... T... T... TT−2... T−2T−1... T−1... T... T

... ... ...                    

> 1... 12... 2... M... M
> 0... 01... 1... M−1... M−1

... ... ...                  

> 0... 00... 0... 1... 10... 00... 0... 0... 0



. (20) In this matrix, the column axis corresponds to decreasing noise levels, while the row axis represents the sequential generation of the atomic structure. We introduce a new window size u, within which atoms share the same noise level. The boundaries of each window are denoted by dashed lines in equation 20. The denoising process progresses row-by-row, iterating left-to-right across columns according to the noise levels specified by K. In the final row, the noise levels of all atoms are reduced to 0, converging to clean data. In our ablation study, the window size u is set to 1.C.3 SUPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTS 

Generation for Unseen or Rare Molecular Sizes. During the generation process, the EDM model exhibits a notable limitation: when processing a graph of size n, it primarily generates molecular features corresponding to molecules of the same size n present in its training set. To investigate this size bias, we conducted an experiment: we challenged EDM to generate 10,000 molecules of unseen or rare sizes. For comparison, our method (EAD) does not require predefined molecular sizes for sampling. Thus, we randomly extracted 5,000 molecules of comparable sizes from EAD’s overall generated results. Upon evaluating the uniqueness of the generated molecules (see Table 6), we observed that EDM frequently generates identical molecules. We attribute EAD’s superior performance to its inherent ability to incorporate and generate molecular features of varying sizes during the generation process, leading to greater diversity. Table 6: Uniqueness and novelty over 10000 molecules with defined molecular size. Molecular Size EDM Uniqueness (%) ↑ EAD Uniqueness (%) ↑

30 (0 molecules in the training set) 35.68 44.33 29 (25 molecules) 45.09 60.18 28 (0 molecules) 45.61 65.40 16