Title: 2604.04677v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04677v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 01:45:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
1

Towards p rotein folding pathways by reconstructin g protein residue network s

with a policy -driven m od el

Susan Khor †

6 April, 2026 

A method that reconstructs protein residue networks using suitable node selection and edge recovery 

policies produced numerical observations that correlate strongly (Pearson’s correlation coefficient < -0.8 3)

with published folding rates for 52 two -state folders and 21 multi -state folders; correlations are also strong 

at the fold -family level. These results were obtained serendipitously with the ND model , which was 

introduced previously , but is here extended with policies that dictate actions according to feature states .

Th is result point s to the importance of both the starting search point and the prevailing condition (random 

seed) for the quick success of policy search by a simple hill -climber . The two cond itions, suitable polic ies 

and random seed, which (evidenced by the strong correlation statistic) setup a conducive environment for 

modelling protein folding within ND, could be compared to appropriate physiological conditions required 

by proteins to fold naturally. Of interest is an examination of the sequence of restored edges for potential 

as plausible protein folding pathways. To wards this end, trajectory data is collected for analysis and further 

model evaluation and development. 

Background 

A Protein Residue Network (PRN) is a set of nodes positioned at the CA coordinates of a native state protein 

chain, plus a set of undirected edges connecting node pairs that satisfy certain conditions. A Short Cut 

Network (SCN) is a unique sub -network of a PRN , made up of edges identified by the Euclidean Distance 

Search (EDS) algorithm. EDS is a greedy local search algorithm that exploits the small -world character of 

PRNs to find paths between ordered node pairs. The edges of a SCN are called shortcuts because their 

presence obviate the need for EDS to do backtracking .

The Network Dynamics (ND) method models protein folding by re constructing PRNs. The ND method 

begins with an edgeless PRN whose nodes are fixed at their native -state positions. It then proceeds to 

restore the PRN’s edges by iterating the following two steps. First, ND chooses a node according to a node 

selection policy ( ndv ). Second, ND attempts to restore a chosen node’s edges by an edge recovery policy 

(nde ). 

As a PRN is re constructed by the ND method, the EDS algorithm is run on variously partially completed 

PRNs and identifies different sets of shortcuts edges. Shortcuts identified on partially completed PRNs 

may not all belong to the SCN of the completed PRN. Shortcut edges identified by EDS forms the basis of 

the “energy” calculation or valuation of a SCN. Native shortcuts, those that appear in the SCN of the 

completed PRN, decrease the “energy” of a SCN. Conversely, non -native shorts, those that do not appear 

in the SCN of the completed PRN, increase the valuation of a SCN. A SCN exhibits peak energy (peak E)

when its observed valuation is highest. 

The challenge is to coax the ND method , by finding suitable ndv and nde policies , to reconstruct a set of 

PRNs such that their SCNs reach peak energies that correlate strongly with published folding rates. This   

> †E-mail: slc.khor@gmail.com

2

correlation is a negative one: larger folding rates (faster folders) associate with smaller peak E values , and 

vice versa . For two -state folders, higher peak SCN energies point to larger barriers that slow down the 

folding process modelled as PRN re construction. 

PRN construction, SCN identification by the EDS algorithm, and the ND method were introduced previously 

in reference [1]. That study focused on two -state folders , used a simple edge recovery strategy, and 

reported poor results for multi -state folders. This study attends to fold -family level results and report s on 

how a contextualized edge restoration probability can significantly improve d ND results for both two - and 

multi -state folders .

Dataset 

Protein chains are partitioned into three fold -families by their simplified DSSP [2] assigned secondary 

structure; each chain residue is labelled H (DSSP: G, H, I), S (DSSP: E, B), or T (otherwise). The three fold -

families are: A for chains with predominantly α-helix secondary structure (number of α residues (nH) > 3, 

number of β residues (nS) < 11, and nH/nS ≈ nH or >> 1 ); B for chains with predominantly β-strand 

secondary structure (nH < 4, nS > 10, and nH/nS ≈ 0.0 ); and AB otherwise. 

Using the above criteria, the Uzunoglu dataset [3] consists of 15 A (1ayi, 1enh, 1fex, 1idy, 1imq, 1lmb, 1ryk, 

1ss1, 1w4e, 1w4j, 1yza, 2abd, 2bth, 2pdd, 1hrc ), 17 B (1c9o, 1csp, 1e0l, 1e0m, 1fnf_9, 1g6p, 1jo8, 1k9q, 

1m9s, 1mjc, 1psf, 1rlq, 1shf, 1shg, 1ten, 1tit, 3ait ), and 20 AB (1afi, 1aps, 1bf4, 1div_c, 1div_n, 1fkb, 1n88, 

1o6x, 1pgb, 1poh, 1rfa, 1ris, 1spr, 1ubq, 1urn, 2acy, 2ci2, 2ptl, 2qjl, 2vik ) two -state folders with lengths 

(number of amino acids) ranging from 37 to 1 26 . And t he Kamagata dataset [4] comprises 5 A (2cro, 1cei, 

2abd, 1dwr, 2a5e ), 3 B (1hng, 1tit, 1ttg), and 13 AB (1pgb, 1gxt, 1bta, 1bni, 1adw, 3chy, 1ael, 1joo, 1ilb, 

2rn2, 1ra9, 1l63, 1php ) multi -state folders with lengths ranging from 56 to 175. 

Policy -driven ND 

The ND method is parameterized by two policies , ndv and nde , which govern how nodes are selected and 

how edges are recovered , respectively. The basic idea is to select a n incomplete node , i.e. a node with 

missing or hitherto unrecovered edges , and then attempt to complete the node by restor ing all its PRN 

edges. 

The node selection policy ( ndv ) is determined by fold -family. F or both A and B fold -families , ndv choose s

uniform ly at random from incomplete nodes. For the AB fold -family , ndv does crony selection : if this is the 

first node selection, choose uniformly at random from all nodes ; otherwise choose uniformly at random 

from incomplete nodes that are directly connected to the previously chosen node . If all nodes within the 

direct neighbourhood of the previously chosen node (includes the previously chosen node itself) are 

complete , then choose uniformly at random from all remaining incomplete nodes . In contrast to uniform 

selection, crony selection attempts to localize edge recovery . From previous experience [1], this approach 

seems favourable for AB chains .

The edge recovery policy ( nde ) prescribes an action given an edge -state . To follow the protein folding 

principle of minimiz ing loss in chain entropy , the edge recovery process is biased towards restoring edges 

wh ose range is more local on the linear protein sequence . E dges with smaller sequence separation tend 3

to have higher edge restoration probability ( pe) than edges with larger sequence separation. The four 

possible action s prescribed by nde , s (scaled) , sl (scaled -lower) , su (scaled -upper) , and u (unscaled) , tune s

the extent of this bias (Table 1) . Actions s and u exert the strongest and the weakest bias , respectively 

(Fig. 1) .

Table 1 Definitions of the four nde actions 

Action  Description  Edge r estoration probability ( pe) for an edge ( u, v)

u unscaled  peunscaled = 1.0 / ln(|u -v|) 

s scaled  pescaled = maximum of 1e -4 and (peunscaled – pemin ) / (pemax – pemin )

sl  scaled -lower  pescaled -lower = pescaled plus a small positive adjustment  where 

 is a uniform random real between 1e -3 and ( peunscaled - pescaled ) /2.0 

su  scaled -upper  pescaled -upper = pescaled plus a small positive adjustment  where 

 is a uniform random real between ( peunscaled - pescaled ) /2.0 and ( peunscaled - pescaled )

In Table 1, | u-v| is the sequence separation between nodes u and v; pemin and pemax are the inverse of the 

natural logarithm (ln) of the largest and smallest sequence separation for a PRN, respectively. The bias 

effect of each nde action on pe are compared in Fig. 1 for a range of hypothetical sequence distances. 

Fig. 1 Edge restoration probability (pe) under the influence of nde actions .

The concept of edge -state captures an edge’s secondary structure context within the direct (1 -hop) 

neighbourhood of the edge’s two end -point nodes. PRN nodes are initially tagged as H (DSSP: G, H, I), S

(DSSP: E, B), or T (otherwise) . N1SS v label ling expands on these initial tags to include the tags within a 

node’s 1 -hop neighbourhood. For example, the N1SS v label for an S tagged node linked directly to six 

nodes tagged H and two nodes tagged T, is HST. The set of all possible N1SS v labels are H, S, T, HS, HT, ST, 

and HST .

The edge -state f or edge (u, v) is the union of the N1SS v labels of nodes u and v. In Fig. 2 , since the green 

node and the yellow node have the N1SS v labels of HS and HST respectively , the edge -state of the link 

between these two nodes is HS -HST. 4 

> Fig. 2 Edge -state of the bolded link is HS -HST.

Observe that the N1SS v labels of an edge’s end -point nodes must have at least one tag (H, S or T) in 

common. For instance, H -S is not a valid edge -state because there can be no edge that connects a node 

whose N1SS v label is H (which means the H tagged node is directed ly connected to H tagged nodes only )

to a node whose N1SS v label is S (which means the S tagged node is directly connected to S tagged nodes 

only) . Hence, the set of possible edge -states are: H-H, H -HS, H -HT, H -HST, S-S, S -HS, S -ST, S -HST, T-T, T -HT, 

T-ST, T -HST, HS -HS, HS -HT, HS -ST, HS -HST, HT -HT, HT -ST, HT -HST, ST -ST, ST -HST , and HST -HST .

Policy Search 

Given a set of PRNs and the node selection policy ( ndv ) described above, t he objective is to find an edge 

recovery policy , denoted nde *, that optimizes the correlation between peak E values produced by ND and 

published folding rates. 

With 22 possible edge -states and four possible actions per edge -state, the size of the search space is 4 22 

or 10 13.2 4532 . However, n ot all 22 edge -states appear in every set of PRNs. For example, t he five A fold -

family PRNs and the three B fold -family PRNs from the Kamagata dataset , have only eight and five relevant 

edge -states , respectively . Edge -states that do not appear in the set of given PRNs are discovered prior to 

search, ignored during search, and prescribed no action by nde .

The search for nde * is performed by a simple greedy hill -climber , starting at a best single -action nde policy. 

A single -action nde policy prescribes the same action for all relevant edge -states. The four possible single -

action nde policies are evaluated, and the one which produced the strongest correlation becomes “the 

parent genotype” or starting point of search for the hill -climber. 

In hill -climbing search, t he “genes” of the parent genotype are mutated (action s prescribed for relevant 

edge -states are altered ) to create “child genotypes” ( possibly new nde policies). If a child genotype is 

found to be fitt er (is a better nde policy) than its parent, it replaces the parent genotyp e, which is the 

current nde *, and the hill -climbing search continues with the new parent genotype .

The hill -climber used to find nde * in this report does an exhaustive and systematic scan of the 1 -mutation 

neighbourhood before proceeding to the 2 -mutation neighbourhood . The search is stopped after 20 4

distinct nde policies have been evaluated .

Fig. 3 illustrates a hill -climbing search by fold -family for nde * with the Kamagata dataset. The exploration 

phase determined that the initial parent genotype for A, B and AB fold -families are single -action policies 5

with actions sl , u, and u, respectively (Fig. 3 top) . In the exploitation phase , for each fold -family, the hill -

climber generates new policy variants f rom the current parent genotype , evaluates them, and replaces 

the current parent genotype if a better policy variant is found. The red x’s in Fig. 3 (middle) mark when 

the best nde policies (nde *) are found for fold -families A, B and AB , respecti vely , within the allotted search 

resources, i.e. number of unique nde polic y evaluations . The peak E values produced by ND with nde * for 

each fold -family are plotted against published folding rates in Fig. 3 (bottom ). The fold -family specific 

Pearson’s correlation coefficients are all below -0.85 .    

> Fig. 3 A h ill -climbing search for nde *by fold -family with the Kamagata dataset.

6

Results and Discussion 

The peak E values generated by ND with nde * for each fold -family are put together to produce the overall 

correlation with published folding rates for the two datasets , as shown in Figs. 4 and 5 . Coincidentally, 

this simple combination yielded strong (  < -0.83) and statistically significant (p -value  0.0) Pearson’s 

correlation coefficients for both datasets. The contributing nde policies are inscribed in Table s 2 and 3 .                                                                                            

> Fig. 4 ND results with random seed 13 and nde *found by fold -family for the 52 two -state folders in the Uzunoglu
> dataset. The combined Pearson’s correlation coefficient is -0.8383 with p -value 0.0. Fold -family specific
> correlations are all below -0.7 65and significant with p-value < 0.001.
> Table 2. The best nde policies found by fold -family A, B and AB supporting the ND results in Fig. 4 .
> Edge -state
> H-H
> H-HS
> H-HT
> H-HST
> S-S
> S-HS
> S-ST
> S-HST
> T-T
> T-HT
> T-ST
> T-HST
> HS -HS
> HS -HT
> HS -ST
> HS -HST
> HT -HT
> HT -ST
> HT -HST
> ST -ST
> ST -HST
> HST -HST
> Au-s-----sl sl ssu ----sl su sl sl su su
> B----sl uslusu -su sl --su s---sl sl su
> AB usl usl susu susussusl susl sl susl susuuslsl s

The two -step procedure described above , first obtain good peak E values by fold -family and then combine 

them, is essential to produce the strong overall correlation. Ceteris paribus and with the same random 

seed used to produce the result in Fig. 5, the hill -climbing method searched for a universal nde *, i.e. one 

nde * for all chains in the Kamagata dataset. The outcome of this experiment is displayed on the right in 

Fig. 5: the overall correlation is much weaker (  < -0.66), and so are the correlations at the fold -family 

level. This poorer result could be due to conflicting best policies between fold -families. Additionally, 

almost 62% (13/21) of chains in this dataset belong to the AB fold -family. This dataset imbalance would 

bias the policy search, during both the exploration and exploitation phases, to optimize for the dominating 

fold -family . Further, searching for a universal nde * enlarge s the search space for some sets of PRNs 

unnecessarily . ND is native -centric; PRNs are built from coordinates of native chain topologies [5]. 

Therefore, secondary structure is known and fold -family can be computed with only a little extra effort. 7

Fig. 5 Left: ND results with random seed 23 and nde * found by fold -family for the 21 multi -state folders in the 

Kamagata dataset. The combined Pearson’s correlation coefficient is -0.8 997 with p -value  0.0. Fold -family specific 

correlations are all below -0. 85 6, with p -value < 0.0 64 . Right: ND results with random seed 23 for the same dataset 

but nde * found universally (for all chains in the dataset simultaneously). The combined Pearson’s correlation 

coefficient is -0.6654 with p -value  0.001. Fold -family specific correlations are all below 0. 22 1, with p -value < 0. 859.

Table 3. The best nde policies by fold -family A, B and AB , and universally U, supporting the ND results in Fig. 5.

> Edge -state
> H-H
> H-HS
> H-HT
> H-HST
> S-S
> S-HS
> S-ST
> S-HST
> T-T
> T-HT
> T-ST
> T-HST
> HS -HS
> HS -HT
> HS -ST
> HS -HST
> HT -HT
> HT -ST
> HT -HST
> ST -ST
> ST -HST
> HST -HST

A su  - u su  - - - - u sl  - - - - - - u - u - - u

B - - - - u - s - su  - su  - - - - - - - - sl  - - 

> AB

u u u u u su  u u u u u u u u u u u u u s u u

U su  u u u s u u u s s u s u sl  u u u u u s u u

The results shown in Fig s. 4 and 5 were obtained with random seeds 13 and 23 for the Uzunoglu and 

Kamagata datasets, respectively. Th is element of serendipity indicates the importance of both the initial 

search point (parent genotype) and the prevailing condition provided by the random seed , towards 

locatin g an appropriate edge recovery policy ( nde *) efficiently . The two factors , suitable policies and 

random seed, help create a favourable environment for modelling protein folding with ND . They could be 

viewed as analogous to near physiological conditions necessary for proteins to collapse to their native 

functional folds. 

However, more important than the computational model or its optimal policies, is what the sequence of 

restored edges could reveal about protein folding pathways. To facilitate this goal , trajectory data are 

available ‡ for further analysis and model improvement . 

> ‡

github.com/pfwscn 8

References 

1.  Khor S. (2021) Forming native shortcut networks to simulate protein folding. 

DOI:  10.48550/arXiv.1902.06333 

2.  Kabsch W, Sander C. (1983) Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recognition of 

hydrogen -bonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers 22:2577 -2637. 

3.  Kaya H, Uzunoglu Z, Chan HS. (2013) Spatial ranges of driving forces are a key determinant of protein 

folding cooperativity and rate diversity. Phys Rev E 88:044701. 

4.  Kamagata K, Arai M, Kuwajima K. (2004) Unification of the folding mechanisms of nontwo -state and 

two -state proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 339(4):951 –965. 

5.  Berman HM , Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN , Weissig H, Shindyalov IN , Bourne PE . (2002) 

The Protein Data Bank . Nucleic Acids Research 28: 235 -242 . RCSB.org